Good morning.
(coughing)
(coughing) Please.
Not cheering.
You need
more seats. You'll need
a bigger office. (laughing)
Not as many, not as many as the Fients though.
Oh. (laughing) Still coming.
It's because it's the most interesting committee.
There's nothing else going on today.
(laughing) Is the chair here? Someone, if they want to-
Pull that chair up and take it to the floor.
Sam, come off the table.
Come sit with me.
Here, if he wants.
(laughing)
Might be needed.
Yeah, and I'll go down there and ask questions.
(laughing) Next year.
Very good. All right. Good morning, Minister.
Welcome along to the Foreign Affairs Defence Trade Committee.
We are very excited to be conducting the annual review for the-
(clears throat)
... Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade today.
Uh, and we welcome your presence with us this morning for 30 minutes to
give us some oversight in your role as Associate Minister on behalf of the
Minister, but obviously also as Minister of Trade and Investment too, I'm sure you
have questions.
So, I'd like to hand over to you for some introductory comments and then
there will be questions from members around the room. Thank you.
Well, thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you. And committee members.
I'm pleased to appear before the committee and I extend apologies from
the, the, uh, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Right Honourable Winston
Peters, who's unable to join us today.
Advancing and protecting New Zealand's national interests in this more
contested, fragmented and volatile world requires
determination and focus. Over the past year, the government has
responded to an increasingly challenging international environment with
energy, resolve and with hard work.
Uh, we have sustained a high tempo of international engagement, engagement at
senior levels across government, focused on advancing the security and
prosperity for all New Zealanders.
Minister Peters' travel, along with that of the Prime Minister, the Minister of
Defence, the Minister of Climate Change and myself has involved 88
high-level visits to 43 countries over the past
year. This outward engagement was, um, supplemented by hosting
62 high-level visits to New Zealand by foreign leaders and
ministers, showcasing the best our country has to
offer and what we can offer to the world.
Uh, collectively, this investment in building the international
connections, uh, at a political, at a political level is a clear
demonstration of our partners that New Zealand
has contributed, has, uh, a contribution to make and a
role to play on the global stage. These relations also
set the platform for advancing the government's ambitious,
ambitions across foreign policy trade and development
cooperation. Um, Mr Chair, the past year has seen
strong delivery against priorities set out in the government's foreign policy
reset. In the face of economic and geopolitical
headwinds, uh, the foreign policy reset ensures our resources
are directed, uh, are, are sent in the direction of efforts and
are aligned in pursuing outcomes that matter to the security and
prosperity of New Zealand. Notwithstanding these headwinds, headwinds,
we have delivered real progress across all key lines of effort in the
reset. Uh, priority relations in South and Southeast Asia
have been elevated through the comprehensive strategic partnerships with ASEAN as a
whole and with Vietnam and Singapore.
Uh, the relationship with India has seen a step change with enhanced political and
defence engagement, and good progress has been made on the bilateral
FTA negotiations following its launch in, only
just in March of this year. Similar in North Asia, the
relationship with the Republic of Korea has recently been bolstered with
the conclusion of a comprehensive strategic partnership and
high-level engagement with China, including the Prime Minister's visit
2025, has reinforced that important
relationship. There's been increased effort in supporting
resilient and prosperous Pacific demonstrated through delivery of
over $517 million NZD in development cooperation
funding in the year 24-25,
aligned with our Pacific partners priorities, continued
investment in Pacific regional institutions and humanitarian
assistance, including following the December 2024
earthquakes in Vanuatu.
We have reinvigorated our relationship with like-minded partners,
including through enhanced political engagement in Canberra, in
London, Washington and Ottawa, sustained engagement in many
lateral groups like the Indo-Pacific Four, and in
contributions to collective security challenges, including supporting
Ukraine's self-defence in the face of Russia's ongoing
agression- aggression, following their illegal invasion.
We have targeted our multilateral engagement on global issues that
matter most to New Zealand, including improving international stewardship of
oceans, promoting reform of key multilateral institutions,
upholding the Antarctic Treaty System, and contributing
to global climate action and to disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts. And we've strengthened our international
trade architecture-
(coughing)
... in support of the government's goal of achieving a significant step change in
export value over the next decade.
A new trade agreement with UAE, United Arab Emirates and an,
and an updated ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand agreement
entered into force, and negotiations were concluded with the Gulf
Cooperation Council. Our focus on full
implementation of recent trade agreements with the UK and the EU has
delivered significant growth and exports into those markets, creating
more opportunities and delivering greater returns for New Zealand.
And I want to recognise the support across the House for many of those agreements,
including the early entry into force of the EU agreement and the
significant benefits delivering for all New Zealanders, particularly
exporters. We've also demonstrated leadership and creativity in
working to sustain the international rules-based trading system, which
remains under challenge, contributing to the establishment of the
future investment and trade partnership, uh, and advancing
opportunities for deeper engagement between the EU and the
CPTPP members. These outcomes all represent
serious progress on the ambition of the reset and
reflecting the strong leadership and direction the government is
bringing to its international...... engagement.
Um, the past year has also required resilience and agility to respond to
pressing challenges beyond the reset priorities.
For example, emergency responses following natural disasters in the Pacific
and arising from conflicts in the Middle East have required the evacuation of New
Zealand citizens from dangerous situations offshore.
In the trade and economic domain, the government has worked hard to support New
Zealand businesses in navigating uncertainty, including through the impact of
US tariffs. This will remain a priority and was
positive, uh, it was positive to see a step in the right direction last month
with the removal of additional tariffs on a range of New Zealand
agricultural, uh, products in, in the US.
Being, um, positioned to manage uncertainty
is the reality we face in a more challenged world.
Advancing our priorities and defending our interests is a collective effort
across government, including my cabinet colleagues and the broad range of
New Zealand in- agencies who all play an important role in helping
deliver on the ambition of the reset.
We enhance our influence and effectiveness in the work,
uh, in the world by working collectively to address
cross-cutting challenges and develop coordinated approaches, and by
using all levers at our disposal. Uh, Mr.
Chair and, uh, committee members, I thank you for the time today.
I know that you have, uh, some hours before you, uh,
with officials. I, uh, have, uh, um, the chief executive of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Bed Corry, here with me today, and the
senior leadership team, uh, including Bengalis Vitalis, uh, who
will help, uh, me, uh, in the trade area.
Uh, but yeah, I'm very happy to hear from you.
Excellent. Thank you very much for that, Minister.
Um, can I just clarify before we get underway, which two of the three Labour
members are participating?
No, no, usually I, I thought I'd been swapped out. That's right.
No, I'll just sit here.
I'm out.
Were you out?
And Bernadette.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm very relaxed about an extra member asking a question.
Sorry-
(laughs)
... so you don't have to, you don't have to exclude somebody for my benefit.
Very generous. Very generous. Okay.
First question anyway, the Honorable Peeni Henare.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Minister, officials.
Um, thank you for your comprehensive remarks, uh, to open our
session. You are right. Some of these, some of the more technical matters we can
dive into, uh, with the officials.
My first question, uh, is the big move on Pacific
reset, uh, and, uh, from the
outset, it looks like it's the right thing to do.
Yet what we're seeing across the Pacific, uh, far more
challenges, uh, arising despite the huge efforts over the
past two years, uh, with the Pacific reset.
I wondered if, Minister, you'd like to offer some views on that?
Yeah. Well, the Pacific reset is very important.
Uh, I, I would argue that, uh, one of, probably one of New Zealand's greatest
obligations as a good neighbor and a friend is to our, you know, Pacific
countries and particularly, uh, many of the smaller nations that face
challenges around climate change.
And, you know, they're not immune to the geopolitical challenges that are going on
around the world. Uh, we work closely with other
countries, uh, advocating strongly, of course, for Australia, uh,
with the US, with Europe, with most parts of the world about
the importance of engagement with the Pacific and support them.
Uh, a lot of what we do is around the development, uh, space, uh, um,
to support the nations, uh, uh, to help grow greater
self-sufficiency. But we also need to recognize, you know, whilst
geo- ge- geographical isolation in itself is a
wonderful thing when you need peace and quiet, that the Pacific
has not always been as quiet and peaceful as we are used to.
And so, we have continued to step up our efforts there.
But maybe for greater detail about some of the activities in the, the reset either
now or later on, officials could help that.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Celia Abraham.
Um, thank you. Um, following on your question from about the
Pacific, um,
I was interested, I've got some bigger questions, but I'd just like to focus on
this given, um, the attendance of our colleagues from Vanuatu.
Yeah.
Um, and I'd like to offer my sympathies for the earthquake
almost a year ago. Um, and I wondered if you could enlarge or one
of your, um, s- staff could enlarge on the
humanitarian assistance to Port Vila and other areas there.
Yeah. Well, thank you so much. Well, firstly, recognizing members of parliament
here from Vanuatu, and thank you for, thank you for coming to New Zealand.
The relationship we have with Vanuatu is extremely important to New Zealand, not
only to the, the, the government. Uh, and whenever there
are challenges, uh, um, natural events, earthquakes and so
on, New Zealand very easily quickly steps up to provide assistance.
It's not a difficult decision to make, uh, funding losses is,
uh, uh, uh, there available. Uh, actually, we believe as good neighbors and
friends that we have an obligation to do that.
And, um, you know, the, the work that, uh, uh, New Zealand
officials and others are doing is important.
And I know directly from the Vanuatu government, it is welcomed and they're
very pleased. And so, uh, you, you know, if I have a simple
message for our Pacific neighbors is they don't have to worry about the
support of New Zealands in time, New Zealand's in time of challenge and
trouble. We have rights and obligations of both sides.
We, uh, you know, we address them respectfully as our
equals, but they also have obligations to us and to
themselves at the same time. But Bed, perhaps, um, sorry if there's a little bit
more particularly on our efforts in Vanuatu.
Well, thank you, Minister. Thank you, committee. And good morning.
Um, Bernadette may have further detail, but just to reaffirm the, the points that
the minister has made, and we were, we were very, uh, quick off the
mark to provide the, the help that was needed following that terrible
earthquake last year. And it was in some ways a sort of a twofold
crisis because obviously it affected our staff as well in our high commission, but
also more, more tragically, um, impacted the people of
Vanuatu. Uh,
and there are, in a way, two stages to this.
There was the immediate response we had to provide...
... which is the kind of things you can imagine you need immediately after an
earthquake. But there is also a long tail of
reconstruction, uh, that will ensue.
Um, one, one good example, for example, is, is the
damage done to the education sector across Vanuatu, the
damage done to its, its schooling infrastructure.
And that's an area where New Zealand will be engaging in a
multi-year, multimillion dollar program to help sustain
that, that, uh, those, those vital schools, uh, to keep the
children of Vanuatu educated despite the, the terrible plight the country is in
as a result of the earthquake. Bernadette may have points to add.
Yeah. Thank you very much. Good morning.
Um, and just very briefly to add, I think one of the interesting things out of this
one was, A, I was getting in very quickly, um, and particularly with our, with
our friends, Australia, so our friends, um, colleagues, to do the immediate
assessment piece. But one of the things we did was have engineers up there very
quickly from Beca who actually were able to do assessments through particularly the
education sector and work out which buildings, school buildings were gonna be
safe. So, they immediately had to be dealt with, which, which are the ones that we
will be dealing with over time. And actually, literally, uh,
literally today, our high commission team are just moving
into a, uh, a temporary, a longer term temporary
premise for them, which just shows one year on of how challenging it
has been on the ground with so much, um, so much infrastructure damage.
So, it was a, um, a, a tragedy and sadly, um, one that we have
many times over in the Pacific.
Thank you. Thank you. We share the ring of fire.
Next question, Vanesh Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, minister, and your officials for your
work. Um, probably most recently the announcements in terms of
supporting Ukraine and support for those impacted by Cyclone
Detua as well. Um, I wonder if the, minister, if you've
received or sought advice in relation to
whether, uh, it's likely or not that we would be in breach
of our FTAs, any of our FTAs, should we fail
to meet our Paris climate target?
Well, the government, uh, has set out, uh, how it will achieve, uh, our
obligation to Paris of net zero by 2050.
And as I said earlier at the Minister of Climate Change earlier this year, that
they, the good news is the, the, the, the pathway gets us there further
than, uh, 2050. Uh, uh, we take our
obligations extremely seriously in all international agreements, trade agreements
as well as those on, uh, climate change.
And so ultimately, um, it's a hypothetical question
as to the effect, uh, uh, it might have upon our trade under a number
of free trade agreements because we are on track to do that.
The one thing I would like to clarify though is that there, there is a, a confusion
or misconception, uh, that says when we enter into agreement with another
government on trade, you know, perhaps in the trade agreement, that that country,
that government has authority to tell the New Zealand Parliament what to do.
If you look at those agreements, many of them are greater than aspirational, but it
is very clear it is the sovereign right of the New Zealand Parliament to make
decisions in the best interests of New Zealand.
And how we meet those obligations is actually what we are, you know, going through
and dealing with now. Y- you will have seen that the European Commissioner for
Trade and Industry, uh, was in New Zealand just quite
recently. Uh, we had a very big trade summit.
There were a lot of, uh, businesses from Europe that came down to see what more
we could do together under the free trade agreement.
He was asked the same question, it was only a week or so after the government had
announced, uh, its new, uh, uh, um, policy on how the
agriculture sector would meet its obligations and its contribution to
New Zealand being net zero by 2050.
He, to the media and subsequently in other engagement, said he
had seen the changes that New Zealand had made, he believed they were compatible
with the free trade agreement, uh, and that New Zealand meets its obligations.
And it was for us to decide how to do that.
And so, uh, uh, uh, there is no advice that I have based on the
decisions that have been made, uh, that were contraventions of the, any
agreement. And the reason for that is the government takes their obligations
seriously, and would not make a decision that would contravene the current free
trade agreement. So-
Just very quick sup- And thank you for that, uh, that explanation.
I agree that it's up to New Zealand to decide how we meet those
targets. Should we fail to do so, however, is there legal
advice, advice in terms-
Well-
... of what our potential liability is?
Well interestingly, there's two parts of the debate.
The first is our obligation under Paris, uh, to be net zero by 2050.
The second is there are domestic targets set by the last government.
Unfortunately, when the previous government set those targets
a- around NDCs in 2030, it was already impossible at that time to meet
them. And so actually, hypothetically, uh, that was a
question that might have been asked by a previous cabinet.
However, the very good news is we are on target, on track to meet an
obligation by 2050. And therefore, to suppose what would
happen if we didn't is not an important discussion to have because
we remain on track.
Supplementary from-
No, not... It's the new primary. Thank you.
Oh, okay. Sorry. We'll come to Tim Costly first.
Yeah. My question's also on trade agreements.
Um, we've seen a, a lot of progress I think in the year,
but this one, uh, we had the Gulf States agreement
signed. But I think also there'd be a lot of interest in hearing
about India and progress there. Are you able to-
Yeah.
... um, touch on sort of free trade for the year in review, but also with an eye to
the future?
Yeah. Well, I suppose more broadly to start, that New Zealand's a trading nation.
You know, it's often said 400 million people around the world get 10% of their diet
from New Zealand. Uh, we produce more food and fiber than we could
consume ourselves. It is of very high quality. It has some...
You know, New Zealand producers have some of the highest quality reputation or
best reputation of anywhere in the world.
And the world and consumers are demanding this.
With that comes a story of provenance.
So, in everything the government does, current and previous governments, it is
about upholding that reputation. But the world is not a fair place.
People don't have to buy from us. And so-
Mm-hmm.
So ultimately, the government's job is to level the playing field.
We are blessed to have, uh, I would say arguably the best trade
negotiators in the world.... and particularly, you know, for our
slides, uh, and I know, uh, uh, that's the envy of many
other ministers that I go up against to talk about trade and we negotiate
against. You know, New Zealand has, uh, around 100 free
trade, uh, double tax or investment agreements with countries of
the world, which levels the playing field, and it gives real opportunity for New
Zealand businesses to consider risk and where they want to put
their own effort rather than the government telling them what they should do.
So, our job is to level the playing field.
Uh, well, you know, I was very pleased that we were able to reach across the House
and get the UFTA in force many, many months sooner than
had been predicted, and we did that because, one, trade should be
bipartisan. It doesn't mean we have to agree on everything, but we must
agree trade access is good for New Zealand.
And if we don't do that, then fundamentally, we don't understand how the New
Zealand economy works, and we miss opportunities to tell New Zealanders that
we wholeheartedly, as a Parliament, will back them on the world stage,
that EUFTA having entered into force early, uh, in the first 18
months has been, uh, worth an extra $2 billion worth of
exports from New Zealand, that largely would not have happened
without that agreement. Uh, and secondly, uh, the EU- the
UKFTA has seen a very significant increase in exports
over the two years. The, uh, trade agreement with the UAE, which was
the fastest negotiated-
Yeah.
... uh, uh, by our officials in the history of New Zealand on the highest quality
on entry to force now has entered into force, and it opens up huge
opportunities, a $500 billion, uh, market for New
Zealand. You mentioned the GCC. That's concluded. It's yet to be signed.
The, the member countries are going through the process of, uh, getting
permission to sign. We expect that will happen-
Yeah.
... in due course. And with India, um, uh, you know, against, uh, uh, a
lot of, um, concern that in a, you know,
a, a negotiation might not be able to take place, talk about
priority, whether India should be a priority or not, I was very pleased with the
Prime Minister in March of this year.
Only eight months ago, we were able to launch negotiations.
There has been significant engagement across the board from both
sides. You would have seen I hosted the, the Indian Trade Minister-
Yeah.
... to New Zealand and have just been back there, uh, uh, recently, and I
expect one more trip to India before the end of this
year. We are making progress and making good progress, but there remains a lot
of work to do because I will only come back to the Prime Minister and Cabinet and
say, "We should conclude if it is meaningful and a good deal
for New Zealand."
And supplementary if I, if I can. So, c- d- d- do you
have an example you can give us of what that ...
Like, you talked about the UAE and that coming into force earlier, in fact, so
early I think we, we beat this year in review.
But, um, the, the, the Gulf states, the UAE, uh,
U- the EU, now working on India. What- what's the tangible deliverable
that gives to New Zealand, those agreements, and, and the immense workload
that goes in from MFAT-
Yeah.
... and, and others to deliver?
Well, it's a huge amount of work on the part of MFAT just both during the
negotiation, but, but equally as importantly, post, uh,
conclusion to socialize and promote the agreement.
There's this very unusual thing happens in trade.
Uh, when two governments say they're gonna, want to negotiate a trade agreement,
generally trade starts going up.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, when they conclude, even if it's not implemented, trade goes up.
And then, of course, when it's i- cl- included in force, it can't
... That's without us doing anything.
But what we know is when we do go and put an effort, MFACT go around the
country holding seminars and providing information, then
exponentially the opportunity through trade is more significant.
In the first year of the UKFTA, I don't remember exact
figures so don't hold me to them, but whilst our trade increased, we found 30
to 40% of exporters were not using the new FTA with
preferential access. And largely that may be because they
weren't aware of it or aware of how.
And so rather than saying they're wrong, it's our job to help, uh, get out there
and, and pull them into it, because generally New Zealanders
benefit. W- w- y- you know, there's a lot of information being provided, and
why don't I leave it to officials later and when you, we talk to them about some of
the statistics. But it is simple as that.
If you take the UKFTA, the EUFTA, uh, the start of
the, the UAE one, the incus- increase in trade in the GCC,
and we have seen an increase in trade in India since the Government started talking
so positively about that-
Mm-hmm. ... the tangible ge- benefit for New Zealanders is more jobs,
higher-paying jobs, and greater economic certainty.
You know, when I go out on the world stage with my officials, I go out there not to
fix the problems of the world, to deliver a good deal for Kiwis,
to back them so that they can do well in New Zealand and continue to do well
internationally.
Thank you, Peter.
Excellent. Next question. Celia Wadburn.
Thank you. Um, in the annual report, there's, um, some mention of
humanitarian aid and evacuations on- for Gaza,
and there's some mention of ministerial, um,
statements. I would like to know, um, what
advice was given to the Government about recognition of
Palestine? Um,
what were the main arguments and evidence presented
by MFAT, um, in favor of
recognition, and how were they evaluated?
Yeah. Look, a lot of that information has been released already, but at a higher
level, um, uh, um, you know, the Government has considered this very, very
carefully. There have been a wide number, a growing number,
of statements on behalf of the Government, from the Prime Minister, and
from the, uh, Minister of Foreign Affairs, including in our
Parliament, uh, uh, talking about the great tragedy of what
has happened in Gaza. We have been calling for enduring peace and the need for
peace o- on both sides. Cabinet have very carefully weighed
up, uh, uh, the pros and cons of, of, uh, this
issue. Uh, and, uh, I want to be very clear, as I think the Minister of Foreign
Affairs has when he made a very detailed, uh,
statement in the United Nations of New Zealand's position,
it is not a matter of if, if it is a matter of when, uh, New Zealand
would recognize, uh-... Palestine, but
the conditions are not there at the moment for it to meet the test in international
law. It is of each country to make that decision for itself, but
we take our responsibilities very carefully.
But in as far as a bit more detail, perhaps I'll pass to, uh, Bee
Gluhrman.
Okay. Did you-
W- Well, no, no, I'll hear from you and then I've, uh, a couple more
sups, unless you, you may answer them as well.
Sure. Okay.
Thank you.
So we provided, we provided advice on three
options, effectively, to the minister.
And qu- as the minister said, quite a lot of this is now available on the MFAT
website 'cause we've done a proactive release so that you can see the back and
forth between us and the minister's office on this.
We provided advice on, on recognition, on
recognition with conditions, and on non-recognition.
None of those options were straightforward in our eyes.
All of them carried risks,
and our advice tended towards
recognition. But this has, this is the minister's paper.
The minister has to be comfortable with the recommendations in it for him to take
it to cabinet. And in the back and forth with the minister's office, he made it
clear that recognition, straight-up recognition, wasn't something that he
supported because, again as the minister said, there
are too many questions about exactly what the future government might
look like. Hamas is still there. Hamas hasn't
disarmed. There's big questions about whether the
Palestinian Authority is ready to step up and govern all
of the occupied Palestinian territories or whether there has to be some alternative
to that. So at the time, um,
at the time the advice was that there were three different options the minister w-
could go with, and the minister decided to proceed with
non-recognition at that time.
Well, just to clarify, it was a cabinet decision.
Yes, indeed it was.
Absolutely.
Yeah, yeah. And as the minister said, we still believe in the right
for Palestinians to self-determine their future and we think that having two states
sitting side by side would enable both populations to live in peace, but
we're just not at that point at the moment.
And
subsequently, what, or maybe leading up to
the decision, what reports or advice did you
receive from, um, our
friends and allies, uh, Western countries that did
recognize Palestine?
They-
What, what, what, you know, what has been the impact on our
relationships-
Yeah.
... with other countries that-
Mm-hmm.
... you know, Canada, France, et cetera, that did?
Mm-hmm. Well, the Minister of Foreign Affairs engaged very widely on a number of
issues, uh, both here in New Zealand and as he has traveled.
I know he's had extensive conversations with various countries.
Some of that, uh, would be better for him to talk about at another stage
rather than, than me, I think. Uh, but at the same time that the cabinet took a
decision, uh, uh, I, uh, as I have chaired ...
(indistinct) ... has talked directly to other governments about
our position and the reason for it.
Uh, you know, if you think about a few of the countries that you mentioned, we have
had and continue to have very strong and important relationships with them.
Uh, we have the ability to not always agree on everything a- and to have the
ability both publicly, uh, and, uh, uh, you know, directly
have conversations about the reason for these things, uh, that, that there may
be a different position that the governments, uh, takes.
And that's a very important thing when it comes to foreign affairs.
I've often in the past in opposition said, you know,
megaphone, meg- megaphone diplomacy from
Wellington where we're shouting at people but yet delivering, trying to deliver
a message domestically doesn't often work well.
New Zealand is respected for being considered both in foreign affairs and
trade and the decisions that we take, and we're at our best when we're out talking
to others, explaining the position and having an effect upon, uh, you know,
international affairs.
Thank
And would it, would it be fair to say, Minister, that there was a strong focus
through that time on actually trying to improve the humanitarian situation
on the ground, and recognition in and of itself wouldn't achieve that,
whereas actually delivering aid, for example-
Yeah, that's right.
... more tangible for all.
Well, we have made-
... uh, significant, significant contributions, uh, to aid and support,
uh, to the area, uh, for it to, to go to the Gaza.
Uh, we remain very concerned about the humanitarian effect that,
uh, you know, that has happened there, uh, against civilians.
Uh, we have made that clear, uh, both, uh, in Parliament through
statements in the UN and in other forums around the
world, and we feel we have a, uh, continued role to play.
But I think the most important thing here is that for those countries in the world
that have made a decision to recognize, they are no different from New Zealand in
as far as there is not a government there in Palestine to
work with, and that is one of the important things for New Zealand that when we
make the decision, and again it's not a matter of if, it's a matter of when,
that we are able to engage that it is a legitimate government, it is not a
terrorist organization, uh, and that, uh, we will be able to
uphold the very high standards New Zealand always has had in
recognition of statehood.
Can I ask-
Could the Ministry...
I think we might have-
Next question is from, supplementary from Venushi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Of course.
Under international l- law, New Zealand has obligations under the Genocide
Convention as a third party. We also have the ICJ
advisory opinion in relation to the occupied territories that I think
has about five pages worth of, um, information on what third
parties should do. In light of that, what advice, if any,
has the minister sought about New Zealand's obligations under both the
convention and the decision?
Look, I, I think the Minister of Foreign Affairs has made statements as well as
answered questions in the House quite extensively on that.
I don't have a lot more to add other than, you know, the clarity he has delivered
directly to Parli- Parliament on a number of occasions other than
say we take our international obligations very seriously,
including as a result of our engagement with other
organizations. Uh, I'll ask, uh, Bee maybe to comment with the
proviso that in some instances, information or advice we're
given is very, very carefully and strictly legally privileged.
But apart from that, I'll pass to Bee.
Thank you, Minister. I mean, I, I wasn't sure whether the question was drawing a
linkage between, um, any obligations under, uh, the
Genocide Convention or pursuant to ICJ decisions and
recognition, um, but I, I don't think we would draw a direct
red cross between those two.
No.
So, I may have-
Just-
... misunderstood your question.
Y- to clarify, not in terms of recognition, but
procurement, visas, ensuring that there's no third
party information sharing that would breach our obligations.
So not recognition.
I mean, I think as a statement of general principle, we would always uphold our
international obligations. Um, there may be particular points of the law that
I... that in a sub- the subsequent session, um, I could invite
Victoria Hallam, our, our government's chief international legal advisor, to advise
on. But we, we, as a, you know, it's enormously important to New Zealand
always to uphold the international obligations that it subscribed to.
We do got time for one quick supplementary question.
Yeah, just on the advice that the Ministry provided on
recognition, has the Ministry provided that previously in the
last few years? And in particular, I think about May 2021 when there was a
motion before the House, uh, on this matter-
Mm-hmm.
... did it provide the same advice at that time?
That's a good question, and I'm not sure I can answer it, I'm afraid.
It's preceded my time. We provided the advice
before September this year because there was going to be
a dedicated session discussion it, discussing it at the UN General Assembly, and we
wanted to make sure that we were in a position-
But at that time, there was, before the New Zealand Parliament-
Mm-hmm.
... a motion
put, which the then government voted against.
I'm just wondering if they had the same advice.
Well, well, I, I, I would hazard a guess that the advice would be
similar. I mean, circumstances probably have changed, if anything.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Less certain.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, you know, uh, uh-
October 7th.
Less certain-
Yeah. ... actually-
Yeah.
... to enable the New Zealand government to make a decision over
recognition. But ultimately, I, I think probably the point that
you're making is that, uh, successive governments have considered the
issue of recognition, and the previous government landed in a position
where they wouldn't recognize. I, I'm not party to the
exact reasons for them, but I would hazard a guess they would not be dissimilar for
the reasons that the current Cabinet decided not to
recognize at this time. But we support a two-state solution
very clearly. Uh, we are providing assistance, uh, uh, uh, and continue
to where we're able to, uh, from a humana- humanitarian point of
view. And we have said very clearly and possibly I may be
corrected, but for the first time, that recognition is not a matter
of if, it's a matter of when. And when those conditions are
set, I would argue it would be a very easy decision
for a New Zealand, uh, Cabinet to make.
But I'm not sure when conditions will be set because
we are talking about a very challenged part of the world where actually
we would be a- being asked to recognize a state governed by
terrorists.
All right. Thank you very much, Minister.
Appreciate your insights this morning, um, and we will continue
our annual review with
Thank you.
All right.
Welcome along officially for the fun part of,
uh, this morning's session, I'm sure.
Uh, Pete Cryer, welcome to you as chief executive and secretary, and to your wider
team you're supported by here today.
And we look forward to the annual review process this morning.
We have three hours set down. You'll have received the structured agenda from
us outlining the committee's areas of interest, and we'll work through that
systematically. Um, welcome your introductory comments to
get us started, and then there will be questions from members. Thank you.
Kia ora, uh, thank you very much, Mr. Chair, um, and members of the committee.
And good morning also to our, uh, our visitors from, from
Vanuatu. Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak
about, uh, the Ministry's performance over the year under review.
Um, I want to thank the Honourable Todd McClay for highlighting the outcomes
achieved under the government's foreign policy reset.
Um, I'm joined today, uh, by the Ministry's senior leadership team,
uh, immediately at the table, uh, uh, this morning with me are Taha
McPherson, the deputy chief executive for policy, and Cecile
Hillier, the fairly new deputy chief executive for people and
operations. And as you know, a variety of colleagues behind who, who can't wait
for your questions and to assist me-
(laughs)
... in answering them.
Good.
Um, Chair and committee, um,
developments over the last year underscore that New Zealand
faces a world that is ever more fragmented,
contested, and volatile. This is an age,
as a UK assessment recently said, of radical
uncertainty. And the landscape to which we all have been
accustomed, long accustomed, is fading,
and the assumptions that have accompanied it are correspondingly less
valid. The global order
is transitional, and messily
so. Transitional because the
post-war... the post-war order is
changing, and messy because a new system, a system of
norms and, and rules aligned with New Zealand's preferences,
has not replaced it. So this situation is often
attributed to the advent of a new administration in
Washington, which is perhaps the most significant development in world affairs
over the last year. And to be sure, the
United States is taking a new and sometimes disruptive
approach. This, of course, is its
right.And it would be misplaced to see this as
temporary.
America First is a response to domestic factors which
may shape aspects of US policy into the
future. We will have to adjust to
this. But it would also be misplaced to see
global circumstances as somehow only attributable to
the United States. The world is becoming multipolar
as others contest the order as we have known and
preferred it. And this brings risks, especially
if you are not one of the pols. And these are acute
for smaller countries like ours, including when its
manifestations are being increasingly felt to our north in the
wider Indo-Pacific,
in the South Pacific, and as I know the committee is familiar,
uh, to our south in Antarctica.
All this should trouble us deeply, but neither
hand-wringing nor finger-pointing about our outlook is a
solution. We must navigate our way through this
transition while preparing ourselves for what may be
a long
voyage.
We should not expect the volatility to end anytime soon.
There are fundamental changes unfolding.
This may not be so much a year of living
dangerously, as an era of doing
so. And we must navigate this transition with
urgency, with agency, and purpose, not
just to address risks which manifold, but also to seize
opportunities. So, this is the context which has informed our work
over the past year, the context for the achievements which Mr.
McLay has outlined under the priorities of the government's foreign policy reset.
The ministry has made a significant contribution to shaping outcomes
that respond to those circumstances that I've described to
reinforce the security and prosperity of New Zealanders
by providing the government with advice on what a changing world
means for us,
by intensifying collaboration with our partners within
and outside the Pacific, especially our ally
Australia, to build regional resilience, strengthen
governance and security, and importantly, to lift
development outcomes. By investing effort
and reprioritizing resource,
as our annual report lets you know, to enhance relationships across
Asia, better positioning New Zealand to advance its economic and
security interests and take advantage of the region's dynamism,
by working with like-minded partners and across multilateral institutions
to buttress principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
and international law. These are not abstract goals, but
essential features of international order fundamental to New
Zealand's prosperity and security.
By energetic leadership in the new and established minilateral and
plurilateral groupings, whether those focused on strategic
challenges or those that are focused on reinforcing international
trade rules,
and by working to support our exporters, as you heard Mr.
McLay say, through expanding our network of trade
agreements, leveraging existing ones, and
navigating disruptions in the international trading system.
Chairman and committee, as you know, a more fragmented and
contested world means that complex consular problems
are becoming sadly a norm as New Zealanders are
caught up in dangerous situations abroad.
In the last year, the ministry responded to over 38,000
consular inquiries from those New Zealanders over the 12-month
period with 1,600 new cases requiring consular
assistance. This included responses to the
earthquake in Vanuatu, of which we spoke earlier, and events across the
Middle East, including the Israel-Iran conflict.
The ministry's emergency coordination center was activated for 92
days with staff dedicating over a thousand days
of effort to our emergency response processes.
And this isn't just a ministry effort, and I know this committee has been
interested in the past about collaboration with what we call NZ
Inc. Responding to crises offshore requires an effort
across government, and I want to acknowledge the contributions made by multiple
agencies who are essential partners across our
work. In all our work, the ministry,
and through it New Zealand, is served by
1,807 dedicated staff here and at
the 58 posts that make up our global network.
Many are in challenging and sometimes hostile locations where
they serve with their families or sometimes separated from
them. In this and other areas, ensuring that the ministry
meets its health and safety obligations under the relevant legislation
and as a good employer
is central. After the Vanuatu earthquake, which of course did
damage to our high commission, I'm ensuring that the ministry ma- remains
well-positioned to meet those obligations.
This will be a significant focus over the coming year.
More broadly, we're f- we're closely focused on the government's guidance on the
fiscal environment, ensuring efficiency and importance of
delivering impact. In 2024, we
assessed how resource could be realigned to ensure delivery against the
government's priorities and to drive value for money.
This delivered a cost-neutral reprioritization of $46
million worth of diplomatic resource over four
years, which is being reallocated towards delivery of the foreign
policy reset priorities. We've also reviewed the operating
model of the International Development Cooperation Program and the
structure of the Pacific and development group that delivers it....to
improve performance and where we can to reduce
costs. Ensuring that our functions deliver efficiency and
value
will remain a priority over the coming year. Mr.
Chair, committee members, thank you very much for the opportunity, uh, to appear
before you today. And might I say thank you also for your ongoing
interest in the ministry's work-
Good.
...and in New Zealand's foreign policy.
As the j- as the year draws to a close, I want to conclude by thanking the ministry
staff in New Zealand and abroad who continue to deliver
each and every day. It is their professionalism and their
courage that delivers impact for New Zealand in this ever more
challenging world. I'm grateful again for your interest in the
ministry's work, and I now welcome your questions. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much for that introduction.
First question, the honorable Peeni Henare.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank you, Pete, and to the team, uh, for
all of your work and for your introductory comments.
Um, foreign affairs is often seen as a
policy shop. Uh, for me, it is about
(inaudible) so my first question to you is about the people.
You've mentioned the high stress on your, on the diplomatic work-
Mm-hmm.
...on the consular work, uh, the events that are happening around the
world. Uh, the recent survey shows that they are
huge workloads, that while our people enjoy working for our
organizations, that that workload is causing stress
and particular strain, uh, on our people.
I wondered if you had any reflections on the kinds of
challenges, but more importantly, the supports that MFAT would look to
use to support those people in those critical roles.
Yeah. Thank you very much for the question.
It's certainly, um, one that's very much on our minds, and I would
not want to suggest that this is simply a challenge for the ministry.
Um,
uh, the world is a, as I've said in my statement, a- a- a dangerous, turbulent,
volatile, and unpredictable place, and that is driving tempo, um, in-
in- in parts of the government beyond the ministry.
Uh, but I've certainly seen the same results in engagement surveys.
You've had, uh, you've seen about, uh, about
tempo and crisis, and I referred to the number of
days our SEC has been operating. Um,
let, let me start there. Um, every time a major crisis
happens, um, involving either New
Zealand's interests or New Zealanders offshore, and that is a regular
event, not just because of geopolitical issues.
Uh, but as you'll know, um, Mr. Henare, given your former
portfolio, because of, um, climatic issues in the Pacific,
especially hurricanes and cyclones and the way in which they can do terrible
damage to our neighbors, as- as can earthquakes, we pull
together an emergency response system, which is designed
to, uh, support our post, designed to make sure we've
got people in the room who can look after the consulate interests and people who
can deliver the humanitarian response.
And we pull into that other agencies as well, especially, of course, the New
Zealand Defence Force, the New Zealand Police, uh, FEMA, and
others. And what we have found is that each time we've done
that, we've probably reinvented the wheel.
It can be very difficult to ensure that you've got the right
number of trained people in the room to do that.
And it does take a particular skill set to deliver the response.
And so what we've intended to do is go back to the well and ask
the same people to turn up
for that work in the emergency center.
This year, in the last quarter of this year, we've begun a project, a very
deliberate project, to widen the ministry's skills
in this area, to develop what you might call a crisis cutter, a
crisis cohort of more staff who are
skilled, uh, in the delivery of emergency response so that
we're not landing the burden on the same people all the time.
There are some other areas of our work that, that also deliver high
tempo. It's extremely important, uh, in
today's world, and you heard the stats from, um, from Mr.
McLay that ministers travel extensively.
That travel, um, is complex to execute, um,
especially when it involves large-scale business delegations.
Very important part of our work. And that, again, can be a source of
considerable stress to staff. And we are, as we speak,
reviewing the processes by which we deliver those visits, again, to
ensure that we're not reinventing the wheel, that our systems are, are
customized, that our systems are contemporary.
So those are a couple examples of the kinds of things we're doing to, to address
the very real issues you've raised.
Thank
Celia Way Brown.
Thank you. I've got a few different primaries, so I'll just take one and
see how- see how we go. Um, I was interested
in whether you see, um, MFAT having
a... And, and I want to just say, go back to the beginning.
This is the first time I've spoken in this, um,
environment with MFAT, and I just want to say, um, your mention of
New Zealand House early on brought back some very happy memories
from, um, this time
several decades ago, both for myself and also for my
father, who, um, was able to emigrate.
So, um, yeah, that, that's a good start.
Um, for me, anyway. Um, I really wanted to ask
about the role that MFAT plays in, um,
educating or involving, um, New Zealanders with the
United Nations because I see some mention
here with, um, the contributions, the aim to get back on
the Security Council in a future decade, things like that.
But there is, in my view, and there are a number of
conspiracy theories about United Nations and,
um, global control that we would do well
to counter with better information.
Uh, do you see there's a role with MFAT to do that?
Thank, thank you very much for the question.
I mean, I think, um, whenever a New Zealand
minister or, or prime minister, uh, speaks-...
at the United Nations,
uh, whenever we report on a, what we'd call a treaty
action, uh, under UN auspices,
whenever we would make a statement, um, whether on
human rights or the environment, um,
uh, in, under, under auspices that have
a, have a UN dimension,
we are always, I think, speaking to the importance of the UN.
And there will be times when that, that work will demystify
so as to avert the kind of theories that you're talking about.
There are times when the information will just be more focused on the issue at
hand. But I think every articulation of how the
government, um, sees the global issues in which the
UN is engaged is an opportunity to, to talk about why the UN
is important. Uh, and if you looked, for
example, at the Minister of Foreign Affairs' statements before the
United Nations, uh, in the last couple of years, that would be an example of
that. Something we'll give ongoing attention to.
Mm-hmm.
So, there's not a direct connection,
um, in terms of publicizing the
sustainable development goals or w- that would be more of
a United Nations Association of New Zealand role
or...
Uh, it's, it's both/and. Um,
if you loo- look, for example, at the ministry's
website, you'll see a wide array of, of documents
and information which speak to all those sorts of issues.
Thank you.
And, and obviously, organizations like UNANZ and others have a role to play
as well in, in helping, you know, project the message.
Honorable Peeni Henare.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. New primary, um, uh, bed
earlier this year in June. I'm not 100%...
Well, I, I'm pretty sure it was June.
There was an audit, uh, an independent review into the
ministry's health and safety. Uh, it was, I
think it was due to report
recently or it's been concluded recently.
Uh,
does this make you... Are you understanding where I'm
going with this? I'm broadly familiar with what you're talking about.
Oh, okay then.
Yeah. And I understand the ministry hasn't formed any
views or any, any, you know, any views on the recommendations.
Are you able to offer us some insight though on what
is a pretty considerable piece of work given the challenges and, um,
and a whole heap of other function that you've already mentioned in your
first answer to my first question?
Sure. Thank you for the question. So, as you'll all know, the ministry faces
obligations, importantly so, under the Health and Safety at Work Act,
uh, which has now been in place for, I think, nearly, nearly 10
years. And that doesn't just apply
to our operations in New Zealand. It applies extra-territorially.
So, it applies to, uh, uh, our operations
offshore, including our development
program. To take a brief sidebar, even
if it didn't apply, uh, it's,
uh, important to us that we are a good employer.
We want to ensure our staff are, are as safe as is reasonably
practicable. And you're aware, you know, I know as a former defense
minister that there'll be environments sometimes where we have to deploy, which
might be quite risky, but where the importance of the work, um,
uh, sits in a, in a, in a relationship with the risks applying to
it.
So, that legislation has been in place for a number of years.
The ministry have established a number of means of dealing with it,
uh, a number of internal processes.
And a development earlier in the year, uh, namely the, the
earthquake in Vanuatu that's already come up a couple of times, did serious
damage to our high commission, prompted me to,
um, as the chief executive, to want to take a look
at how we were responding to that kind of risk offshore.
Were our systems fit for purpose for identifying and responding to
risk? So, we looked at that specific
instance, how the... about the integrity of the High
Commission building, which I might add, is not one that the New Zealand government
owned. It leased it, and it was occupied by a number of other governments as
well. Uh,
that having been done, I then wanted to look at our overall health and safety
ecosystem.
What is the nature and quality of advice on health and
safety? Uh, how do we govern health and
safety? To what extent are we seeking
external, uh, information on current best
practice in work w- uh, in health and safety?
So, I asked a former, um, uh, highly respected senior public
servant, uh, David Small, to do a review of that
ecosystem. He has recently reported to me on
that, and I'm reflecting on his conclusions.
And in the very early part of 2026, we'll
look for a program of work designed to, um, to address the recommendations that
he's made.
Uh, early 2026, sorry. Did you say?
Early 2026.
Okay. Excellent. Thank you.
Celia White Brown.
Thank you. Um, in quite a different area, um,
the relationship with Cook Islands.
Mm-hmm.
And how the relationship reset's
going and at what stage, um,
as I understand it, and I might stand to be corrected, um,
where we're at with funding support to the Cook Islands.
We might just hold that one until the, uh, international diplomacy section, if
that's all right.
Um, just focusing on-
Done. Oh, sorry.
Yeah, focusing on the strategic direction and overall performance-
Okay.
Okay. ... at the moment.
Yep, yep, yep. No, that's fine. I can, I can see that.
It might get asked by my colleague then.
Um, I've, I do have a overall, sorry, strategic
direction. I do have a question in that area about
artificial intelligence and, um,
the-... really the view of the
ministry and what, what advice you're getting, where you're seeking
information on the, um,
potentially
(clears throat) huge influence that AI will
have on our global relationships.
Well, that's certainly a very apposite, uh, point.
I might answer it in, in, in sort of two buckets, if you like.
Firstly, obviously, um, as an organization, we are
looking at how we can harness the benefits of AI in the
conduct of our work. Uh, so we currently have a pilot project,
um, underway in the ministry, uh, which is very highly subscribed, which is great
to see, uh, as staff, um,
y- you know, experiment, uh, and test how AI can make our
operations more efficient. That very important.
Then there are the wider questions of how AI, um,
uh, can be a force for good and bad in global
affairs, and that is, uh, very much a, a work in
progress as a global debate. Uh, we are
participating some of the significant fora which are designed
to, to govern that. Um, I might ask one of my...
I could ask one of my colleagues, um, active on the multilateral side to talk about
some of the global fora that we're involved in, in, uh, later on, if that would be
helpful.
I would be very interested because, I mean, I see cyberspace gets about one
mention and I don't see any mention of artificial intelligence.
Yeah.
I'm not re- I mean, I, I'm gonna have no problem with you using it as a
tool, but I was more interested in
more global- The foreign policy consequences. Sure.
... consequences.
And cy- cyber, um, cyber is,
is, is referenced significantly because, of course, the, the great risks it poses
to us and to our, our democratic institutions.
But I think Taha might be able to enlighten somewhat on, on AI.
Thank you. And good morning, committee members.
It's always a pleasure to appear before you.
Um,
as you say, I mean, AI is, is a massive potential issue in terms of
military usages as well. So how we're addressing responsible usage of
AI, uh, falls into, I guess, the, that bucket
of issues where we're looking at emerging issues of relevance to New Zealand AI
space, autonomous weapons systems and the like.
Um, to your earlier point, we are engaging across, uh,
particularly multilateral fora, forum, particularly the UN, to try and address how
we can help, uh, promote and develop responsible sort
of, uh, rules for use because we do see the best mechanism for addressing
some of the challenges we see. Militarization, of course, um,
misuse, um, in autonomous weapon systems, for example, use without
sort of, um, without human interventions.
We do see, uh, a multilateral rules, um, system as being the
best way to get agreed international, um, norms,
uh, and rules for usage. Um, these are areas which are evolving quite
quickly. Um, obviously in some areas, probably quickly as some of the
technologies we're trying to regulate.
Um, we're working in the UN, we're working in other international fora.
We're working with our like-minded partners to try, um, and
address some of these issues, but very much from that starting perspective that we
do see the solution to them as being, um, rules for responsible
use. So whether that's in usage of space, whether that's in use of
AI, uh, for military applications, um, that's kind of our
starting point. Um, probably in the, in this...
in the, in the space of AI and autonomous weapons system,
um, we probably don't see or we probably wouldn't assess there to be as fast a
progress as we'd like, um, on the use of AI
and AWS. Um, that's primarily been driven so far through
the consensus-based convention on conventional
weapons, um, and we're trying to sort of move it into the broader UN
system to hopefully sort of drive a little bit more progress.
But certainly these are issues, uh, where we are talking about the
importance, to your earlier point, of New Zealand engaging in the multilateral
system, um, and the importance of the multilateral system in allowing us
to address these issues as a s- relatively small player, but issues which
have huge impact on us, um, really is the multilateral system where we
see the most chances for, for meaningful progress.
Thank you.
So, Tim Cosgrove.
Um, thanks, uh, Mr. Chair.
Just, uh, I guess thinking about the operating environment, strategic
context, as you said, it's complex.
There, there, there is no, um, easy way to tackle this, but I just wonder if we can
have a conversation about the kind of the big picture, the big
strategic ends towards what, what th- towards which
you're working. Not so much the, the, the ways and the means, but-
Mm-hmm.
... focused on the ends. And I know that's...
you can't just boil it down to, "Well, this is the number one priority.
We're just trying to do this thing," but how are you approaching the
world at the moment when, uh, multipolar as you
say, significant tension, potential for, um,
conflict to erupt in, in many different places, in many different shapes and
forms, challenges to trade routes.
Um, I, I wonder if you wanna just give some opening remarks maybe before
I drill in. But what I'm really thinking about here is, you know, are there
big sort of ends? Do you break it down into subsets?
Is it just that relationship building we hope that's gonna pay off one day?
Or are you quite targeted in the approach that you take to particular
relationships or-
Yeah.
And, and so very good question and a hard one to be concise on.
Absolutely.
So, uh, but I, but I will do my best. I mean-
Take your time.
... in a way... Um, thank you. In a way, uh, if
you think about the government's foreign policy reset,
uh, and I think that, uh, we've got a half, half a dozen, uh, lines of
effort, right? Um, of which three are focal.
In other words, even more important than, than the, than the others.
Um, they themselves are a response to the
world as we find it. That is the purpose of the
reset. It's a deliberate allocation of effort to the things that
matter most. So
one of the priorities, also a focal area, is to sustain a deep
focus on the Pacific, uh, both for reasons that the
committee has been historically well familiar with-...
uh, this is our neighborhood, our front yard, we have
constitutional responsibilities, and it is under pressure like never
before, uh, from everything from geopolitical competition through to climatic
impact. So clearly, the Pacific has to be a focus
for us, and that is why it, it sits among those
priorities.
If you move north, you find the area
of greatest economic dynamism. So, if you are
looking to spread your risk to take
account of, of, uh, uh, the fragmenting of
global trade consensus, global trade architecture, uh,
you have to find, you have to ever diversify your, your
economic opportunities. So hence, the focus and the
reset on Asia. Uh, and that's why, uh, there
has been such an incredibly intense effort over the last couple of
years on buttressing those relationships with ASEAN.
It's a $10 billion market, but it's also of course an anchor of
regional stability as, as that important role of mediating
great power interest in Asia. So, you've got that
jointly with, with Southeast Asia, but you also got it severally in
the particular strategic partnerships that have been formed, that have been all
about positioning New Zealand
as one of the top-ranked partners of the countries
concerned. You also have to go, in this troubled world, to
where your friends are. So, we often throw this phrase
around, like-minded. The countries that are, with whom we
have special relationships or which are more disposed to agree with
us. And so that's why one of the reset priorities is
ever deepening those relationships with those close
friends. That's why you've seen such a doubling down of the
relationship with Australia and a strengthening of the alliance
th- that we have. The only a- our only ally being
Australia. That's why you've seen, uh, the prime minister, the foreign minister,
and the minister of defense, uh, intensifying that relationship.
Yeah.
It's why you've seen so much effort go into the UK
relationship, not just because their FTA delivers very
considerable benefits to our exporters, but because the UK, as
we see it, is still a very important force for good in the world.
Still a major aid donor, a contributor to,
uh, to security in the Indo-Pacific, uh, uh, a country with
a spec- some special relationships in the South Pacific.
Hence we've seen, um, uh, the foreign minister in London, very
successful visit by the prime minister in April.
You've seen a similar intensification of, uh, the relationship
with the new Canadian government, um, uh, and you've
seen, of course, a major effort go into the US
relationship, uh, because of the very important role the US plays in the
world. What else are we doing? And please, if I'm
giving you too much information, you can ask questions-
Well, c- No, no, that's good. But can I, can I just drill into that a little bit?
Mm-hmm.
So, we started with the Pacific-
Yeah. ... and you've talked about some of the relationships, uh, with like-minded people
we're drilling into.
Yeah.
Uh, in the Pacific, we obviously see the influence of other, um,
actors and other states and other groups.
For example, an interest maybe from the EU.
Mm-hmm.
Maybe if you compare it to say 10 years ago, the interest of
the, uh, EU and the US, one might have increased, one might have
decreased. That, that sort of shapes how I guess we approach the
Pacific.
You see even Pacific Island nations that are, um,
were once very closely aligned with New Zealand that are looking in other
directions.
Mm.
So, how is it,
um... I understand that, you know, the
Pacific is a, is a key focal area-
Mm.
... for the ministry.
What are we doing about all this?
(laughs) But there's quite an overlap. Well, well, the, yeah, I mean we're going to get to
some of that I guess, but there's quite an overlap between,
um, you know, is it just through trying to build relationships around the outside
and, and to do it? Is it, how does that com- how do you contrast
diplomat relationships with aid, with multilateral
organizations? Yeah. H- I mean, it's a,
I'm, I'm just trying to unpick how you actually make a tangible difference in how
you, uh, deliver-
Sure. So th-
... in, in a complex environment.
Sure. Very, very fair question, and it, it happens on m- multiple
levels. So obviously, there's our direct one-to-one relationship with
Pacific Island countries, and in particular, the work we do with our paid
program, which is designed to be transformative.
We are trying to make a positive difference.
So you have that set of relationships.
You have the way in which we want to work with the Pacific
as a whole through the Pacific Islands Forum.
So, if I might just read across briefly back to ASEAN.
If you think, um, about ASEAN, it has developed this concept called
ASEAN centrality. Very important.
ASEAN sees itself as the kind of fulcrum or the mediator
of great power interest in Southeast Asia, and that
goes to its founding purpose in 1967.
We and other Pacific Island countries are seeking to foster a similar
concept of what I'd call PIF centrality, Pacific Island Forum
centrality. The Pacific will be stronger together.
So, as it's dealing, I think your question is going to, how do we connect our
Pacific interests with what's happening in the wider world?
One of the key vectors for that is the work that we are doing, indeed, it's not
just us, it's the Pacific as a whole, is doing to form a stronger
Pacific Island forum,
uh, uh, centrality, a stronger sense of itself, greater
regionalism, so that it hangs together.
And that's work that we will certainly be looking to take forward when we are the
chair of the forum in 2027. It's work that
the forum is doing itself. There's some quite important, I mean, it might seem
bureaucratic and arcane, but there's some quite important being, work being
done by the forum on how and at what level
and at what intensity it relates to other partners....
because the Pacific now has many suitors.
The world is coming to the region. Many Pacific Island countries are
very small
and can struggle with that attention, and the Pacific is arriving at a
more graduated way of racking and stacking the
partners with which it wants to have most to do.
So, there is that level of work. So bilateral, regional, and
there is the work we do in close dialogue with other partners.
And if you think about some of the big- the big countries with whom we work in the
Pacific, obviously the biggest is Australia, but there are
others. And our- our work and their work is designed
to ensure that we are aligning, that we're not cutting across each
other, that our work isn't duplicative, and that we're all on the same
page. So, this happens at- at multiple levels and it happens,
um, not sequentially but simultaneously.
And- and final one, 'cause I'm pretty sure others will have questions, so I'll go
there if I could. But, um, wh- while we're focused on the
Pacific and the strategic context and the big picture stuff,
what are the shifts that you're seeing, uh, in terms of those
big actors, uh, the US, China,
EU or NATO or the- the sort of the European interest in the Pacific?
Uh, I know that there are some European countries that are very interested in the,
um, Indo-Pacific, for South Korea, Japan, Australia-
Mm-hmm.
... New Zealand, um, but are you seeing a shift in
terms of who is interested and the way that that is playing
out?
Yeah, I think as Bernadette could attest, uh, there- there are new countries
becoming interested every single day, um, from a surprisingly
wide remit of- of countries around the world, including
indeed, uh, in the Middle East, uh, which hitherto has not shown
significant-
Mm-hmm. ... interest in the Pacific. Um, this is for a variety of reasons.
I mean, you know, the Pacific itself has been very successful
in fostering an international identity for Pacific Island nations, and
that's largely off the back of climate change, which has
given Pacific leaders an opportunity to stand tall on the
international stage. And so it's fostered a- a kind of a- a
political profile all of its own, which has attracted interest.
Um, the Pacific has resources,
it has undersea resources, it has fisheries resources, it has resources on
Pacific islands. Clearly another reason for countries to be
interested. The Pacific in a more transactional sense is of course,
um, seen as a, um, you know, a rich stock of votes
for things like, uh, votes in the United Nations, which is...
And now that it is more politically assertive in the world, other countries
are seeing that as a reason-
Mm-hmm. ... for becoming closer. And then there is geopolitical
competition, uh, uh, in the Pacific, which of course is seeing
actors come in and try and balance their...
Ensure that their interests are balanced and reflected.
Fantastic. Yeah. Thank you. Um, I'm just interested in y- your comment
that the ministry has to work harder and with greater agility.
Mm-hmm.
Obviously we're seeing a rapidly evolving environment, lots of things
changing globally. Can you just give us some tangible
examples of what that actually looks like from a, perhaps a culture
shift perspective or, uh, autonomy being given out to
posts perhaps, or how do you demonstrate greater
agility?
I think probably the best stocking of examples there
is the work, and I might ask Vagelas to- to come forward,
um, is the work we have done as a ministry to respond
to changing global trade circumstances, which of course this
year, I mean, you know, there's been a- a- a- a trend of disruption
to- to, uh, global trade in the last
10 years. There's been a- a, in many respects, a kind of deterioration
of the conditions in which New Zealand operates in the world.
And this year, of course, that has- that has further sharpened and it's required
us
to be much more agile, uh, as an organization, just because it's required New
Zealand to be more agile as a country, to respond to some of those shifts.
But I might turn to Vagelas for perhaps a couple of examples of
that.
Yeah. So, um, in terms of the way in which we've tried to now respond and
to-
to deal with that, I mean, there are two
very visible concrete examples we can point to.
The first is, um,
the Prime Minister's, uh, initiative around the CPTPP-EU
dialogue. Uh, so launching that and then pursuing it with
President von der Leyen. Uh, and that dialogue, we had the
first, uh, engagement in Melbourne, uh, nearly
three weeks ago now, where the two
blocks were able to, uh, put out a joint statement with a number
of, sort of a work program and agenda.
Um, and again, that was designed specifically, and in fact, the opening language
very clearly signals that we are in a different world.
Uh,
I've appeared before the committee previously, and I've talked about the golden
weather. Um, that statement makes it clear that those days are really well and
truly over. Uh, we are now grappling with a world that is
both turbulent and difficult. Um, and in
response to the challenges that we're seeing from many of the other
major, uh, trading blocks, uh, this dialogue
process, uh, was a really important kind of way to send a bit of a
message. And if you think this- this block accounts for about 30% of global
GDP together, um, it was designed to send a message of,
"We still care about the rules. Uh, these are really important to us." Uh, we
d- we care about non-discriminatory, transparent, uh,
and,
giving our exporters certainty into international markets,
including into one another.
The work agenda they identified are exactly the kinds of things.
So for example, on artificial intelligence, there was work, uh,
signaled that in the digital space, there would be work around a whole range
of areas, very practically focused.
For example, how would you use artificial intelligence
and the opportunity that-... the movement of electronic transferable
records, how would you use that to try to drive down costs for exporters?
So these kinds of things were a practical attempt not just
to talk about the values of, uh, open trade, but
also to say this is a way to give certainty to our exporters, uh,
that at least this group of countries, a significant bloc, uh,
is looking to deliver that. Look, the second, um,
initiative, again to take your point about tangible
elements, um, less than a year ago, um, four small
countries, New Zealand, Singapore, Switzerland, and the United Arab Emirates, we
got together, um, and we met, uh, sorry, ministers met,
um, in February, I believe. Uh, so no, sorry, it was even
more recently than that. Um, and talked about some of the shared
challenges, not just about what was happening, um, uh, in the United
States, what was happening, um, in terms of the challenges
we were seeing, um, from the other major trading
blocs. And the four of us thought there must be others that have
the same anxiety as us and the same concerns, and
we worked together to try to identify what kinds
of things we'd be concerned about.
So for example, one of the things that small states really worry about is supply
chain resilience, making sure that we're part of supply chains, making sure we have
access to inputs, not just for our own exports but also for
healthcare. The pandemic revealed some of the vulnerabilities that many of us
had.
Uh, the other area they identified, the four of us identified was of course work on
non-tariff barriers, which I know we're coming to in a separate item, so I
won't, um, uh, I won't go into that into too much
detail. Uh, and then the third again was this digital piece.
So again, that's the
fashionable thing. Now the really interesting thing that I think we might call a
sort of a Trump effect is that those four small states, we,
we got together and we said, "Look, let's go try to talk to some others." So
Minister McClay was very active talking to other small and medium-sized
states about this initiative. I'm really pleased to say that when they met in
Singapore, the group of four had turned into a group of
16. And by 16 I mean countries ranging from Norway
in Europe, United Arab Emirates in Middle East, Morocco and
Rwanda in Africa, Uruguay, Costa Rica,
Chile, and other friends in, uh, in, um, Latin
America. We invited observers, so the
Indonesian Minister of Trade, uh, came and attended, uh, the
sessions. Uh, Canada was represented.
The United Kingdom was also there.
Uh, so the 16 of us, um,
committed then and put out, again to be very practical, they put out a
supply chains, um, declaration which essentially did four
things. It put in place contact points.
It committed that we would look to support each other in a
crisis, uh, whenever that might occur.
We identified a number of areas we'd want to look at.
So for some colleagues it's food security.
For others, it's about making sure we can get access to medical equipment,
uh, and so on. And for others, it's access to energy resourcing.
So all of those elements were key drivers of that.
Now the really good thing I think is that, again to come to the tangible
point, is we are gonna host this grouping, uh, next year here in New Zealand.
So Minister McClay invited his colleagues, the 16
ministers. Uh, we expect that actually to, to enlarge.
We've had, um, we've had at least six further (laughs)
requests to join. Um, and we're, we're having to deal with
the question of how big do you want the group to be, and is
there a trade-off between how effective it's going to be and how efficient it's
going to be, um, uh, given it's already a, a large
group? So as we look ahead to next year as our own hosting, we'll
again be thinking what specific tangible things can we do
to give our exporters certainty, to give them an advantage,
uh, and also to protect our own sort of national sovereignty and
also the need to be plugged into those supply chain areas.
So those are two, two specific examples.
Thank you. And within our MFAT network
from the posts but also back here in Wellington,
this will perhaps for you be how do you
see
the need to evolve or what does that look like?
What tangible changes might you be making in terms
potential autonomy in posts or speed of
decision-making? Uh,
as you mentioned, there are an increased number of suitors in the Pacific, for
example, and you know, I've had the opportunity to visit many of those
posts in the Pacific and we've got great people doing amazing things out
there. Um, how do we ensure that we're able to be at the front
and be responsiveness, uh, have the responsiveness necessary, uh, and
also the agility to adapt to those changing environments?
Sure. I mean, the, the extent to which, um, or, or the view on whether a,
um, one of our offshore posts is autonomous or not is probably somewhat in the eye
of the beholder-
(laughs)
... uh, and, and-
... and inevitably some would probably prefer more autonomy than we have, but we
always try and strike a balance between-
Mm-hmm.
... you know, very important that, that the Wellington headquarters is providing
our network with governance policy, the governance view, and the
guidance, and then the posts go forth and develop it-
Mm-hmm.
... um, with as much autonomy as we can possibly give them.
And a very effective post will operate with a lot of autonomy inside that
over- that overall, that overarching sort of policy
framework. I'm not anticipating, um, you know,
particular changes to the way we work in that regard as a response to today's
world. Um, uh, I think we've got a system, uh, which works
pretty effectively of a, of a sort of a central, a central nervous system in
Wellington and these very important limbs out there at 58
places around the world.
Mm.
May I add something?
Just to say, um, one thing that we've been focused on on the operations side is
ensuring that posts have agility in, in terms of the devices that they
have, uh, and the, um, platforms that we give them access to
IT. Um-Our workforce, um, is a
mobile one. Uh, we have people living offshore at our posts, we have people
traveling a lot, uh, and, um, being able to
have functionality to access, um,
uh, documents in the ministry, to send emails regularly,
quickly, regardless of whether you're at the airport for five minutes or whether
you're, uh, in a, an environment which has, um, not got
good, uh, interconnectivity as a priority and something that, um,
is important to staff. We've had feedback from them that they feel that we've not
done as well as we could do, uh, in that area.
And that enables real-time communication in ways that,
um, is important in terms of, uh, communicating about
policy, um, options, representation and advocacy.
So, uh, there's a tools and dimension to that.
Okay, thank you. Um, just one final piece on that.
Mm-hmm.
I guess I'm interested in it also from more of a strategic perspective, but
certainly into the operational lens.
And we heard about this from defense the other day with our
annual review for defense as well, in terms of the approach they're taking to
procurement now moving from a system where it
was very focused on ensuring the cost and
capability were sta- stable, but the
timeframe could vary-
Mm-hmm.
... depending on what was necessary.
And that's now moved to an environment where actually delivering some minimum
viable capability in a quick nature is actually more
important. Now that potentially comes with more risk because you might make some
decisions that are incorrect, but there's also a risk of not
acting efficiently enough. And so we've seen that evolution and how
defense are looking, so that's the sort of lens-
Yeah.
... uh, you know, we talk about greater agility.
I'm interested in whether that's an approach or whether you are amending your
approach-
Yeah.
... with some of those considerations.
Thank you. I can think of another example, and I'm sure, um, Bernadette or Cecile
will be able to speak about it at greater length, but we own,
um, uh, a- and importantly so, we own a lot of
infrastructure in the Pacific. So our high commissions and our staff
housing owned by the New Zealand government, um, more often than
not. Uh, high priority area for New Zealand to be
located and very important that we have e- excellent infrastructure there.
Uh, it's a pretty challenging environment in which to both deliver
infrastructure, it's not as though there are, you know, in many cases, large number
of building companies, for example, or engineering services available.
And it's a very challenging environment in which to service and maintain
infrastructure when you've got, um, you know, extreme weather
events, um, and challenges in terms of supply
maintenance.
So we are now working with providers instead of the ministry being
the, um, uh, in a way sort of providing its own
property maintenance and management services.
We are moving to outsource that capability so that it's
provided to our Pacific posts on a more coherent, more
consistent, uh, and more efficient basis that...
Like, more information on that one. Cecile could, could elaborate.
Would-
Yes, sure.
Um, a- absolutely. Uh, we've talked in the context of New
Zealand's strategic environment and what's in our national interest of the
importance of the Pacific, and yet, uh, it's, it's not a
region, um, in which it's necessarily easy to, to do
business. And that goes to, that goes to the property, that goes to the IT,
goes to the systems that you have. So it has been a particular area of
responsibility for, for the ministry, um, over the
past, uh, past years. Um, and the
contract that we have, um, entered into with a, um,
uh, with a provider who has expertise in maintenance will run
across the whole of the Pacific and bring an enhanced,
um, systematized approach to the way in which we
anticipate maintenance issues, schedule them, uh, and get on top of
them so that the investments that we are also making into infrastructure
in, uh, in the Pacific and certain, um, capitals for us in
terms of chanceries, uh, and of official
residences, which is where a lot of official business gets done.
Um, the advocacy and representation work that, um, New Zealand diplomats
do on behalf of our government, uh, is fit for purpose and that we
then maintain it so it doesn't fall into, into
disorder. Um, and the IT
project, um, making our mobile devices secure,
um, but also more functional and more mobile, uh, is
important. And that's very important in the Pacific.
Um...
Yeah, I mean, our, our capital exposure is not as extensive as defense is.
Um, and it's obviously a different variety of capital that we're, we're
procuring. Uh, but nonetheless, in the Pacific, I mean, we're, we're
building, uh, new, um, high commissions and
residences in Suva, uh, in Rarotonga and Port
Moresby and that's, you know, you're getting into, um,
very significant expenditure north of $100 million-
Mm-hmm.
... um, uh, to do that. So these kind of efficiencies, um,
assume a whole new priority for us.
All right, next question, Vanesha Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and thank you again.
Um, am I correct that there's a $46 million internal
diplomatic reprioritization that's happened?
And if so, um, could you tell us which policy areas in
particular have been deprioritized?
Sure. So l- last year, um,
uh, shortly before I took up my role, the ministry was,
uh, invited by the government to ensure that its resources were
well aligned to, uh, uh, the government's
priorities, the, the six points in the reset,
to ensure that, um,
we were well able to deliver on that reset.
And what we did is look at, we looked at our needs and we thought, "Well, those
needs, you know, that, for the deliver the reset," especially if you're
thinking about a significant lift, for example, in our relationship with
India, but not just India. You will have heard about the priority attaching
to countries like Singapore, um, uh, among
others in Southeast Asia.We needed to reallocate
resource both
to our posts, some of them are pretty small.
Um, uh, indeed, so- some of them are very small,
um, relative to the size, size of the country and size of the opportunity.
And we also needed to ensure that the parts of the Wellington system that
deliver the, deliver the frameworks and the, the, the,
policies for those posts to deliver were also well-resourced.
So we looked across our system at where, whether in terms of
roles, um, or funding,
there was scope to reallocate. Um,
I don't have the details of every single position we reprioritized towards
that. Uh, I think we, we looked at a couple of hours
in the, um, examples of posts w- where we thought we
could find spare resource, if I remember correctly.
Rome was an example, like-
Back in the day.
... then bottom. Uh, Buenos Aires was an example.
Um, now you might think, "Well, what difference is one position going to make?" I
mean, one offshore position of a New Zealand diplomat is more
than just one person's salary. There's housing costs and offshore allowance
costs and so forth. So that provides quite a lot of, every time you do that,
quite a lot of leeway to plus up resources
elsewhere. But there was no particular area,
policy area, where
w- w- we significantly reduced our outputs.
This was more finding areas across the system where we could trim.
And I don't think there is anything we are not doing or doing less well as a
result of it.
And just as supplementary-
Mm-hmm. ... did any of those, uh, downsized positions include our presence
at multilateral organizations, so UN
postings?
I- I can double check that with Victoria on whether any multilateral
postings.
Good morning. Um, yes, we took one role out of, um,
New York. Um-
Sorry, would you mind just coming up here a little bit?
Come to the-
Thank you.
Um... Keep going. Um,
yes. Um, I recall as part of the reprioritization, uh, we
removed one diplomatic role from New York, um,
because that was assessed to be a relatively
well-resourced and resilient team that could manage without
that role. But that was the only one in the multilateral context I'm aware
of. And the, um, work that that individual
position was doing has been able to be redistributed with some
prioritization across that team.
Thank you. Next question, Honorable Peeni Henare.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. If I can keep it on the theme of our people, as been
my, uh, questions for this first section.
Uh, Bead, the... I read in the answers to the
questions that the gender pay gap is still stubborn, stubbornly
in the double digits.
Mm-hmm.
In fact, it's almost twice that of the public sector in the last financial
year and has continued to remain so for the past five
years. Um, I want to
hear from you on not just why that might be the case, but
what we're doing. And I see some of the commentaries about there are pathways
for those, uh, wahine to rise to more senior
roles. Uh, so that's my first question.
And then the second branch to that one is about the safety
of our workers and our staff right around the country from sexual harm and
bullying.
So to address the first question, um, the gender pay gap- gap- pay gap is a matter
of ongoing attention for the ministry and the SLT.
Um, I'll ask Cecile to elaborate, but I think our most significant
challenge to, uh, to realizing a smaller gap is
the preponderance of women in lower paid roles in the ministry
rather than any significant imbalance at the higher levels of the
ministry. Indeed if you looked at the, the balance of this team here
today, if you looked at the balance of our third tier
management, uh, layer in, in Wellington and
the balance of, the gender balance of our heads of mission offshore, you would find
it fairly even. But we do have that issue.
And this is not, not uncommon that women are among, in our lower paid
roles.
That, that's right. Um, it's a... So there's a structural question
in terms of representation of women still, uh,
at, um, at, at levels, lower paid levels, um,
within, within the ministry. Um, there's a question
about what people are paid at the different levels at which the positions are
occupied and the opportunity to rise, um, through,
uh, through different positions in the ministry.
All of these are, um, the subject of focus by our, um,
people, uh, people division, uh, and by our governance committee.
In fact, there's a paper going to our governance committee before the end of the
year looking at pay, um, within, um, bands and
across bands, including from the perspective of, uh, gender and
ethnicity. So it's a, it's a, it's a work in
progress, but I think, um, uh, Bead is absolutely right.
If you look at the preponderance of, um, women on
postings as heads of mission, heads of post, uh, and
now in corporate positions, senior leadership team positions, um, there's
been quite a degree of movement from, um, from what it used to
be.
And your second... Uh, was there a question on your second topic?
Yeah, well, it's hot topic at the moment.
Yeah. And we want to know that, um, you know, uh, sexual
harassment, uh, as well as bullying in general-
Yeah.
... uh, you're confident that across your larger organization,
uh, that, you know, that's, well, well, you know, that,
that, one, that doesn't happen, two, if it does that there are
sufficient processes and protocols in place to make
sure that, uh, the victim or the person
and, and people involved-
Yeah.I wish I could say it doesn't happen,
um, but as in other organizations, it does happen in the
ministry, um, and it's whether sexual harassment or bullying
is completely and utterly unacceptable to me.
And for that reason, I've been putting some effort in recent weeks
to clarifying staff's entitlements and their rights
to be well protected, both from the bullying and
harassment itself, but also the very important issue of what their rights
are in, in respect of being able to raise
complaints. Because there can be, um, you know,
sensitivity
in organizations. People worry,
um, that if they make a complaint, they're going to be seen as a
troublemaker. Or it may be, you know, the harassment may be of a
deeply personal nature and they do not want to share it or complain
about it. I'm very keen to create an environment in
which that is not the case-
Yeah.
... in which the right of staff
to raise complaints and have those complaints managed properly and safely
is very important to me.
If I-
All right.
And if I may just add-
Oh, sorry. Go for it.
Um,
there are a number of ways in which staff can make their concerns known.
There's a lot of, um, engagement with staff on how, how that can
be done. Uh, it includes sort of formal structures as you, as you'd
expect. We have an in-house, um, counselor.
Uh, we have external, um, providers who are available to, to speak with
people. Um, but we also have, uh, 10
networks within the ministry who represent different,
different groups, um, diff- different ethnic groups, um,
women, uh, and we have had unions, and
we find that those are channels that can get used for also drawing our
attention to, to concerns. So, um, but that giving
of trust that people's concerns will be taken seriously, that
they have the rights for them to be taken seriously and for proper process to be
followed is a real focus.
Thank you. All right, final question on this section from Senator Brown.
Thank you. Um, it's a question... Here we are in the capital, and often when
people refer to Wellington, they're talking about it as headquarters for
ministries and government departments and so on.
I just wanted to ask you what work is being done on the
role mayors have, um, when they lead
delegations. Um, so it's the outward side, receive
delegations. Um, once upon a time there was the
China- the joint mayoral forum between China and New
Zealand. I was quite involved in that period, 2014,
2015. Um, it seemed that things were
going... There's a whole... We, we brought that
forward to address the lack of coordination between
ministerial visits and mayoral visits.
And whatever the views of either this government or the general
population about local government here, um, mayors
actually open doors in, um, many Asian countries.
Vietnam, Japan, China. Uh, I don't see
anything about that aspect. My second
question is about how MFAT
works with particularly the mayor of the
capital on making this a welcoming place
for diplomats. And again, I think there have been a
series of mayors that have been more or less involved.
Obviously COVID was a, a bit of a hiccup in all that, but
there is a role for Wellington as a very welcoming
space for our foreign diplomats, and sometimes I
think that opportunity is missed.
So, the outward side, and the particular Wellington
city side.
So thank you for the questions. Um,
a- as you will know, um, and I'm sure other members of the committee as well, what
we call sister city relationships can provide a very good, um,
kind of set of sinews,
uh, to connect
countries, um, below the central government
level, and they can enrich those relationships that are
significant relationships, but they can also be ways of building
relationships that we are seeking to grow and having been a, an
ambassador at three different locations, uh, for New Zealand Offshore, I myself
have seen the value of, of, um, mayoral,
mayoral visits. Uh, not necessarily, they don't necessarily resonate
in every country, but they certainly, as you've indicated, resonate in some parts
of the world, um, and, and are important.
Turning to the mayoral forum, um, I think you mentioned in respect to
China, and my understanding that it's still, that it's still alive and well.
I think indeed there was a meeting
of, I think I'm right in saying of the mayoral forum, uh, in China this
year. In terms of the role that the host city can play,
um, the capital city can play, uh, certainly
agree.
Uh, we of course have to be respectful of a, of a any given
mayor's priorities and their resources.
But obviously, um, if, if the mayor and the
council, um, is able to help,
uh, make our resident missions feel more welcome, that's
obviously a very good thing.
I think, I think there's probably a longer conversation to be had there, and I'd be
very happy as an ex-mayor to, um, do any work
that-
Thank you.
... um, could
make those relationships a little simpler and more productive.
All right. Thank you.
Okay. We'll move now on to the next section on international
trade. This question from Vanushi
Waghulles.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
secret-
I'm sorry, I have this shifting cast of-
No, that's all good. We appreciate the time of your team.
Um, 20- 2030 is not far away-Um, so I'd like
to know, just in the context of the previous discussion with the Minister,
does the Ministry believe that there is a risk that
if we don't meet our Paris climate targets,
we could be in breach of our FTAs?
I'll ask Van Galis to speak to, to the question, um, 'cause he's more familiar with
the, with the obligations you're speaking of.
So yeah, thank you. Um, I don't have very much to add beyond what the
Minister has already said, um, other than to say, um, we
do have in a number of our trade agreements, um, they do contain trade and
sustainable development chapters or, uh, labor chapters and environment
chapters. And we've always had a long tradition of pursuing those
for, uh, for very good trade and environment and
indeed climate change reasons. And those include the fact that we want to make sure
that the environment is not used as a,
uh, uh, as a way to be a barrier to
our exporters. And equally that people don't lower their
standards to try to get a trade advantage, um, in
there. So those, that's been the classical, kind of the orthodox piece,
uh, that has underpinned all of the chapters that we've negotiated.
So if you look to the Korea agreement, the CPTPP, the
EU and the UK, that's all, um, contained there very clearly.
In chapter 26 of the UK FTA, of course that's the environment chapter where there
is a, um, uh, a section on climate
change as there is with the, uh, with the EU agreement.
Uh, and the... I think the important thing there is that the
commitment is an affirmation of our shared
commitment, uh, to implement the Paris, uh,
agreement. So
how countries get there, that is not the role of the trade agreement to
describe. Um, although what we do try to do in the trade agreement, and we
did with the UK and indeed we did with the EU, and we did again with the
agreement on climate change, trade and sustainability, we say that trade has a role
to play in helping us meet those targets.
So in practical terms, um, the UK FTA, the EU
FTA and the agreement on climate change, trade and sustainability, the work we do
in APEF identified, for example, what kinds of environmental goods
and services might help us
reach those, um, climate, uh, objectives.
So for example, eliminating faster the tariff
on a solar panel, um, on air pollution control
equipment, uh, making stronger commitments
on environmental services consultancy.
So allowing that to happen. So to give you a good practical
example, again, um, air pollution control monitoring across the
internet that des- is described explicitly in our ASEAN, Australia and
New Zealand free trade agreement, including for example with Thailand
where we have a, a New Zealand company that monitors air
pollution through from a distance.
So sort of the, uh, mode one commitment as it's
known. Um,
and through those obligations and through those commitments, we look to make sure
that trade makes its contribution.
But we don't pretend that the trade agreement, uh, or the way in which they're
described is the solution or the silver bullet for, uh,
meeting the climate change or any environmental obligations.
But we sort of say
trade is an important contributor, uh, to
that.
Thank you. Just a supplementary, and I appreciate the detail on
that and I think I agree with the Minister and, and your comments that the way in
which we achieve those targets is entirely up to us as a
nation. Um, and appreciate the detail of some of how we're attempting to do
that. Where I think the Minister and I disagreed was he said that we
didn't need advice on the implications of not meeting the targets
or he didn't because we were on track to being able to do
that. Now my view is the responsibility of a government in the
context of trade includes a risk management approach,
and understanding what potential implications might be should we not
reach those targets. But my understanding is that advice has not been
provided on whether there would be potentially any legal
challenges or any other challenges should we not meet those
targets in the agreement. Um, and I would just question whether that's the
best risk management strategy in terms of advice in this space.
Sorry, is the question has advice been provided?
I believe the answer came from the Minister that it hadn't.
Um, my question would be whether it would be prudent to
provide that advice, uh, in the context that
2030 is not that far away.
I, I'm not sure (laughs) I have much to add beyond what the Minister's already
said. Um, when we do the national impact
assessment, uh, which occurred, uh, on the signature of the EU
FTA and the signature of the UK FTA and the signature of
CPTP, in there, the national impact assessment
describes in considerable detail the obligations, uh, of the
agreement. Uh, some of the, uh, some of the challenges
that we might face. So if you look at the, uh, national impact assessment on,
uh, the UK FTA or indeed the EU FTA, you'll see described
there, um, quite properly because it is a requirement of the standing
orders, uh, from parliament to, to look at what the environmental effects
might be and how that is, how that's aligned, uh, with domestic
policy.
Last sup- um, so am I correct that it's your assessment that there would-
wouldn't be legal risk should we not breach
the climate targets?
S- so I'm, I'm an economist, so I can't, uh-
(laughs) . ... give you that answer and I think you're, as you'll be well aware, the question
of legally privileged advice and so on is something that, um,
Oh, ab- absolutely. And I, and I, and I wouldn't-
So
you are aware yourself- ... seek the contect- con- content of the advice, simply that it had been
provided to the Minister.
Yeah, so look, certainly in, in terms of whether the advice has been provided,
that's within scope. In terms of asking the Ministry to speculate on what may or
may not be advice provided in the future is outside of scope,
it wouldn't be appropriate for them to respond to now.
But in terms of the advice to date-
... absolutely. If there's anything you want to add to that?
I, I think I would only add that, um,
in, um, considering how we
engage in our, um, trade commitments, but also
in working with the, um, ministry responsible
for the implementation of, um, New
Zealand's admissions reduction program, which is of course the Ministry for the
Environment,
um, bec- because, uh, New Zealand is a country focused on
compliance, uh, with international obligations, it's safe to
assume that this is always an element of the, the
consideration and the advice that's going on.
So, the committee can rest assured of, of, of that, um, and I
understand that the Ministry for the Environment, which has the
lead responsibility, uh, in this area, is having its
review in a nearby room.
All right, supplementary questions. Dr.
Laurence, you're now on-
Um, thank you, Chair. I've got a number of supplementary questions on this.
Um, firstly, so the UK has raised,
uh, issues of oil and gas development with New Zealand on several occasions,
including following the New Zealand budget announcement, and also after the
environment climate change sub-committee meeting between the UK and
NZ. Would you mind just ex- talking the, to the com- the
committee through on the conversations in that sub-committee?
S- so in the, in the sub-committee, this wasn't raised.
It was raised after the sub-committee.
Okay.
So the sub-committee on environment climate change, which is a functional committee
of the UK FTA of our architecture-
Mm-hmm.
... um, as the UK High Commission has now corrected the record.
Cool.
Um, so that, that discussion happened-
Yeah.
... um,
separately.
So, what other concerns have the UK have raised regarding oil and gas
development?
S- so the... As I understand it, the concern has been
around, um, the assistance that might be provided
to, to oil and gas. Um, but the direct connection to the
FTA, uh, that has not been raised in that context.
Okay. And what sort of advice has MFAT provided to the
trade minister around, following from, um, Venetia Walter's
question, around compliance with the ACCTS
as a result of, um, the very strict
requirement around offshore oil and gas exploitation,
exploration?
Sorry, you mean in terms of?
Um, in terms of the oil and gas, and particularly around subsidies
to fossil fuel. There was a specific requirement within ACCTS
between those signatories to not provide that.
So, what sort of advice has MFAT provided to the trade minister?
So, the Agreement on Climate Change and Trade and Sustainability, which is a really
important, um, agreement, uh, it has the
three elements. It, as you say, it has a subsidy, uh, component to
it. Uh, I think the first observation I'd make is the agreement's not enforced yet.
New Zealand has ratified, but it hasn't entered into force yet because a number of
our colleagues have yet to conclude their procedures, particularly, um,
Switzerland, which has an e- elongated, um,
process. To your question, um,
the government
subsidy to the investment, the $200 million as you said,
um, that will be offered on commercial terms, and therefore, in
our understanding of the agreement, which of course we negotiated,
um, that would not, um, conform to the definition of a subsidy.
Um, just a few more questions relating to trade, Chair.
Um, one of the things that is, that we ask NZTE as well, and this is
something that was on MFATS at the beginning of the year, um, noting
that CBAM is gonna be fully coming into effect on the 1st of January,
2026, what work has MFAT done in terms of,
um,
I guess, working through the kind of
carbon, uh, border adjustments for exporters going to
EU as a result of the full implementation of CBAM?
So yes, uh, the CBAM, uh, Carbon Border Adjustment
Mechanism, is one of the, uh, uh, one of the very big challenges that,
uh, uh, that are faced there, both in terms of an
implementation phase, which the European Union is now, uh,
bringing in. Uh, at this stage, of course, the European Union has focused it on
cement and chemicals, as you know.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and so, what we are, obviously we're saying to
our exporters, "You need to comply with those obligations," although
most of New Zealand's exports in this area don't go into those, uh,
particular sectors. The point that we've been making to the European
Union, of course, is that, um, this is a, this is in effect
a unilateral measure-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, that is implementing
by itself, uh, and
the way in which it gets implemented becomes very important, and part of that
is, uh, WTO consistency, so that is a
very important feature of what we expect from the Carbon
Border Adjustment Mechanism, so for example, that it's transparently put in
place, that it's non-discriminatory, uh,
that national treatment applies.
In other words, the way in which they treat, uh, domestic,
uh, uh, producers is the same as the way in which they
would produ- uh, for a, uh, a- a New
Zealand exporter into the market.
That it's gotta be science-based.
Uh, that's another important principle for the way in which you construct, uh,
these carbon border adjustment, um, measures.
Uh, and on all of those features, that there is a period of consultation with
partners, uh, and New Zealand was one of the partners that was consulted, and
we, um, have, uh, talked to the
European Union about the, the fact that this is a unilateral measure at a time
when, uh, uh, unilateral trade measures are not particularly
welcome, uh, given the, the turbulence that's out
there, uh, at present.So that, that tends to be the
feature of our, um, our focus. One of the areas
obviously we're particularly focused in, on is at ex- so at
the moment, CBAM is focused very much on the very high carbon emitting,
um, industries, uh, in Europe, because the concern in Europe, of course,
is about leveling the playing field, um, from their perspective.
As you can imagine, developing countries have been, um,
(laughs) vivid, shall we say, in their criticism of this
scheme. Uh, so in the World Trade Organization, this has been a
big feature, not just of the General Council on Trade meetings, but also on the
Committee for Trade and Environment, uh, as well as in the Technical Barriers
for Trade Committee. So in all of those committees, a number, a group of
developing countries, some very large actors, have been
very critical of this scheme as, uh,
being extremely damaging and distorting their access to
market. The thing that we're very focused on, and we've
been, um, talking to our EU colleagues, uh, a lot about this is, of
course, what might happen if, uh, Europe looked to
extend this. Because of course, the temptation is you start with a few sectors, and
then you start to expand it out. Uh, and there, of course, there are significant
risks for us. Again, unilateralism is
not a favored policy of, um, of New Zealand in,
whether it's in the trade sphere or in the, uh, in the environment sphere.
So we are very keen to encourage Europe and indeed-
(coughs) ... others that are contemplating these kinds of schemes, that we do really need to
find a multilateral solution to this rather than a series of
unilateral, uh, measures that, uh, certainly s- I see risk for
us.
Can I just-
Sorry.
... check-
We have a supplementary from Vanushi Walters.
Thank you. Um, I was going to mention that we ..........................
I have more subs on this.
Yeah, I hear that. Thank you.
Nice, yeah.
Yep.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, just connected to climate and trade
again, we also have a landmark decision advisory
opinion from the ICJ this year. And my question
is whether, and it- it points to potential exposure for
countries on a legal, in the legal space.
So my question is whether advice has been provided to the
minister about our potential risk
as well as our obligations in, in the connection to
trade?
Uh, thank you. Um, the advisory opinion you
refer to is indeed a significant and
landmark, uh, decision from the International Court of
Justice. It's one that actually owes its origin, um,
to the Pacific region, um, and New Zealand lent
considerable diplomatic effort, uh, to the core group of
countries, uh, to get the General dis- Assembly to
request the opinion from the ICJ. Um, the opinion,
uh, is, uh, extremely len- lengthy and
thorough, um, and we are studying the
implications, um, and are considering,
considering that. Um, and that, that's all I can say about, that's, this at this
stage.
Thank you.
Dr. Laurence Xue Nan.
Thank you, Chair. Um, just following on from what you said,
so
in terms of CBAM, is the focus right now more
about working with... Now we have brought Aotearoa New Zealand as part of
that, I'm g- I'm hearing, Development Country Collective, um, in
challenging the WTO and the unilateral decision through the WTO, as
opposed to getting our own exporters up to speed on the
requirement?
Uh, no, I didn't want you to misunderstand me.
I was trying to make an observation that developing countries were very concerned
about the measure. Um, we- we have engaged directly
with, uh, with Europe, including through the structured co- the
architecture that we have in the EU-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, which
includes a Committee on, um, Trade and Sustainable Development.
And the f- the focus for us has been, and CBAM
is only one element of, um, some of the challenges that we
foresee, uh, you know, again, coming to this, the effect of a
unilateral measure. Um, I think it's also important to acknowledge
that the EU is also, um, implementing, uh,
as I'm sure you're well aware, the forestry-
Mm-hmm.
... deforestation, um, regulation.
Uh, and again, another unilateral measure, uh, something where
we obviously, and as the minister has said publicly, we obviously
share the concern about deforestation internationally, let alone
in, uh, in Europe. Um, but the way in which you achieve
that, that, that is the question. And when that starts to affect, uh, New Zealand
exporters, where we have robust domestic law against
deforestation, the additional
transaction cost of needing to demonstrate to, uh, the
EU that we have a similar level of
commitment and, and obligation, and that therefore our exporters are, uh,
necessarily certified for that. That addis- that
addit- that provides additional cost, uh, to New Zealand
exporters.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and that is something that we are
very vigorously pursuing with the, with Europe because having got the
FTA-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, you then get this additional access, but then these additional, you know,
what are in effect non-tariff barriers are being imposed on you.
Even though we share the objective and even though it's clear, uh, that the
EU has already identified us as a low-risk, uh, economy, even a
low-risk country has transaction costs to demonstrate.
There's, uh, as you'll be well aware, there's a GPS coordinate that you need to
demonstrate where your product has come from.
You need to provide the chain, uh, of evidence around where the product is
being done and how it's being processed so that you can, um,
persuasively, uh, sustain the argument that you are low
risk. Now, those transaction costs are actually lower than, of course, if you're a
medium-risk or a high-risk, uh, economy.
Nevertheless, those are additional costs to New Zealand exporters at a time
when.... we do not need, uh, to be having to pay those additional
costs, particularly when we have a free trade agreement that gives us tariff-free
access.
One final thought on this, Chair. Um, you mentioned in terms of forest,
because right now, you're right, it's, you know, it's kind of concrete, it's, um,
aluminium, uh, energy in some instances as well.
Uh, and sorry, electricity in some instances as well.
And you mentioned forestry being a concern, something on your radar.
Can also check is agriculture on, also on your radar?
Because currently we export 30% of our dairy into
EU, and if agriculture is brought into
CBAM, I want
(inaudible) ... the particular calculation, but roughly we're looking at
$450 million per annum on the
cost for exporters here in terms of CBAM.
I-
Just CBAM alone.
I can absolutely assure you (laughs) that agriculture is top of my (laughs) list
of, uh, anxieties, not just with the EU but- but more
generally. Um, one of the big challenges that we face in terms of
international agriculture trade that New Zealand has faced since forever
has been not just the barrier at the border, the classical tariff-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, but also the distorting effects of the subsidies.
And unfortunately, it is a lived reality
that the European Union has been one of the most, um, one of
the big subsidizers (clears throat)
in the world. So w- we always use the example that in 1995 when the World Trade Organization was
established
and we got the Agricultural Agreement which instituted the first major cuts to
agricultural subsidies, that together the United States and the
EU accounted for 80% of global agricultural
subsidies that we had identified as having a- a trade-distorting
effect. Fast-forward to today and
they... it's still those two
plus two new ones, China and India, who are, uh,
the bulk subsidizers of- of, um, of
agricultural production and therefore have this sig- significant impact
on, um, uh, on global trade flows, and in particular,
on us. So
we have already a longstanding problem, uh, with, uh, not just
the European Union, it's unfair to single them out, but a whole range of economies
that are using subsidies now to drive their, uh, incomes for farmers
up.
Mm-hmm.
New Zealand, of course, has no such support in place.
And that remains a primary focus for my team is to find ways to deal
with that.
So one of our major successes was in the Nairobi, uh,
agreement at the WTO in 2015, um,
the elimination of agricultural export subsidies was achieved.
So sometimes when we're a little bit down on the WTO, we need to remember that
it has done some very significant things and it provides a framework that
assures us, it can assure us, that subsidies
remain, uh, part of the work agenda, that if you're going to
design a carbon border adjustment mechanism, you need to use, it needs to
have science-based, it needs to be non-discriminatory, it needs to
be, uh, not more, um,
not more trade distortive than necessary.
Uh, that's not the precise legal phrase, but that's the, uh, the language that's
used. So we have this sort of double challenge now.
We have the subsidization which has been going on, uh, since
time immemorial in those big economies, and on top of that, we
have deforestation regulation being
imposed, although we're hopeful that there's going to be a further,
um, uh, delay in the implementation of that.
And then there's the challenge of the carbon border adjustment mechanism.
Mm-hmm.
And then what I would say is the risk is that you have a contagion
effect, that what happens is that one partner puts in place a carbon border
adjustment mechanism, another partner says, "I may not do that,
but I'm gonna
provide additional, um, farm subsidies," for example.
Mm-hmm.
And so you have this contagion effect where each of the big players is increasingly
stepping outside-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, of the rules-based trading system.
And in a world when that is really disintegrating around us, uh, these things
really are a concern. So all of these things, and again, to come back to your
original question, is agriculture on my mind?
Agriculture is top of my mind for the good reasons that you identified-
Yeah.
... 'cause it's such a critical part of our economy.
Absolutely. I have a-
Thank you.
... primary on this, but I'll wait.
(laughs)
Uh, just want to come now to non-tariff barriers.
Obviously it's an area that committee's had a keen focus on.
Mm-hmm.
I'm interested in a bit more insight in how that's been tracking.
See another good year of progress there.
Mm-hmm. Off the back of last year's results as well.
Uh, can you just give us some i- insight into how that's been tracking since the
end of financial year as well, um, and any particular
challenges or- or new issues that have popped up in that
space?
So, um,
yeah, so non-tariff barriers, um, I mean, maybe to make
a couple of observations about, um, ac- actually
four, um, 'cause I wanna make a distinction between sort of the orthodox
understanding of what a non-tariff barrier is and then the sort
of the other non-tariff barriers that we're starting to see emerge or
re-emerge or have been intensified.
And I already touched on one, uh, which really
we as a country need not, we should not forget about, which of course is, is
subsidies-
Mm-hmm. ... and the distortion that they introduce-
(coughs)
... into the system. But to come, come back to non-tariff barriers,
so this has been a primary focus for our group now for a number of years, and we
have set up quite an elaborate sort of methodology and structure to
track, uh, these. So at the moment, uh, we have
174 non-tariff barriers under active, uh, work.
They cover we estimate roughly $9 billion worth of,
uh, New Zealand, uh, exports. Uh, you'll have seen in the
annual report that we've, um, addressed, uh, 15 of those.
So in a sort of, uh,
quite a, a, a structured, uh, methodical
process we work through. And I do want to emphasize this is not just the work of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, it's the work of colleagues at MPI-
Yep.
... uh, NZTE, Customs, uh, MB and so on, we all do work
together-... to try to address these.
And often, some of the barriers are more directly in MPI's work,
sanitary and phytosanitary standards, for example.
Or in the work of, uh, uh, of MBIE,
often a technical barrier for trade, a new labeling program will need their
assistance to help us identify how discriminatory it is, how unfair it is,
what additional transaction costs it imposes on our business, and then how do
we take it forward. So that, sort of in that orthodox sense, uh, that's how
we, we have that. We also look to break down,
um, the non-tariff barriers. So for example, 56% of them are
in the food and beverage area, so the overwhelming bulk go to the point that was
made earlier in terms of the agriculture sector.
Uh, we're seeing an interesting increase in non-tariff
barriers on services. So 16% of the barriers that
we're tracking are in services. These are additional certification
requirements, uh, additional obligations.
So if you're an engineer wanting to work in country X, uh, a
country may impose an additional six-month stand-down period, for
example, before you can actually practice there, or may
require, uh, your documentation, uh, to be
renewed every year rather than every two years, uh, that it
had been previously. Uh, and I want to come to how the FTAs might be able to help
us there, uh, as well. Um, in the manufacturing
sector, uh, about 3% of the non-tariff barriers we're tracking are in
that sector. They tend to be in the industrial, uh, uh, products
area. Had an interesting one on milking machines, for example.
So some, um,
all of those elements. Now the one that, the new one that was interesting to me is,
um, uh, in the IT sector, we've seen, uh, for the first
time, uh, barriers starting to emerge in sort of digital trade as
well. So those are kind of the, the range of
non-tariff barriers that we deal with.
And, and as I said, they range from certification requirements,
from labeling requirements, right through to the way in which a
product is boxed. So we've had cases where
(laughs) , cases, um, we've had boxes, uh, where they've said to
us, "Right, this year, it's that dimension," and then
six months later, just happens to be at the precise moment that our export season
picks up, they change it. Uh, they change the boxing, uh,
so the size of the box has to be longer and narrower.
Uh, and each time, uh, our team and, um, and
the trade and economic group and Foreign Affairs and Trade with MPI, uh,
with our colleagues offshore, we look to push back against
that. In terms of, um, how we try
to deal with these, uh, you'll see in our annual report, we've described
some of the, um,
specific, uh, non-tariff barriers that we've resolved.
Uh, deer velvet, for example, getting access to the Chinese cosmetics market in
a very, uh, discrete, uh, niche area.
Um, think, I think it's also worth knowing that
we, as we are thinking about how to deal with these, um,
non-tariff barriers, we're also thinking very practically about how do we, how do
we resolve them? And it's sort of as a kind of economic diplomacy project,
um, we've now thought through much more carefully how we might
do this in a structured way. So the classical piece, first of all, is you identify
what the problem is. Where is the difficulty?
Often we hear that from our exporters.
They come to us with a specific problem, they register that, we
then check that with our colleagues in MPI,
actually with the Ministry for Environment as well, because sometimes, uh, it can,
it can... Uh, a New Zealand exporter comes to us with a specific problem that
says, "I'm being asked to re- to meet this environmental standard.
Is that fair?" Uh, now, sometimes it's not, but
sometimes it is. We also have requirements of products that come into New
Zealand that have to meet, um, animal food, uh,-
Mm. ... safety standards as well. And so we are very quick to tell the exporter, "No,
no, that is a requirement you need to, you need to meet it, it is not a non-tariff
barrier." Um, how do we
then try to d- do that? First of all, we think about it in a bilateral sense.
How would we do it, um,
by ourselves? But we're also increasingly realizing that we are not the only
one that may be facing the barrier.
So if we're exporting, for example, blueberries somewhere, we may well find that
our Chilean colleagues and our Costa Rican colleagues may have exactly the
same, uh, problem as us, and therefore we're
discovering that we have opportunities to work together in particular capitals.
So you may be in a capital which has imposed this new barrier,
and you ask your staff in the High Commission or the embassy to work with their
colleagues in other ones to check who else has this problem,
and is there scope for us then to lobby together?
Uh, so for the ambassador or the deputy, you know, depending on, on our
escalation strategy to take that on with, um, with the capital that
they're in. The third area, though, that we're looking at
is our free trade agreements all contain,
uh, pieces of architecture that allow us to raise these questions with
our, our colleagues in those, uh, agreements.
So for example, the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand FTA, the CPTPP
agreement, there are specific committees
where there is an obligation on the part of the partner to respond to our
queries. So we've become much more active now in using that
architecture to supplement our diplomacy on the
ground, to try to make sure that we get answers and responses from
people. And it isn't an academic question for the exporter
concerned whose product is either on the water or stuck at the wharf
to have this difficulty. So often we find that if we invoke
the trade agreement and we say, "Look through the particular barriers to trade
committee, there is a contact point.
I need you to be aware, colleague X, that, uh, this problem has
emerged and my product is stuck at the wharf." Uh, and actually there's an
obligation in this agreement to clear that product within six hours
or within 24 hours, depending on which agreement we're talking about.
We found that to be a very effective mechanism, uh, and one of the new pieces
of using and making more effective our-...
uh, our trade agreements. The fourth area we
have is, um, through the World Trade Organization, so the
SPS Committee, the Technical Barriers to Trade Committee, the General Council on
Trade, and the Trading Goods Committee.
All of these committees can be used by us to raise specific
questions or to highlight a particular problem that we're
experiencing, uh, with a, with a partner out there.
So for example, um, we've been, uh, we are one of
the most active users of the SPS and TBT committees to
raise concerns about other countries', uh, barriers to our
exporters. And what we find there is, the World Trade Organization, with its
166 members, gives us a chance to alert other colleagues to
this problem, and then we discover that we've got a larger and growing
group of countries who've got the same problem in terms of getting blueberries
access, or onions access, or, uh, kiwifruit access.
Well, usually, usually it's just the Chileans and us.
But you're able to then work with a group, uh, and not have to do
that by yourself. And that brings me to the final observation I'd make, is one of
the things we're trying to think about is, how would we do this in a structured
way, uh, in a methodical way
that would support the system? And we're thinking here of a non-tariff barrier
plurilateral agreement-
Mm-hmm.
... with a group of countries, mostly small and medium-sized
economies like us, that face these challenges.
What's really interesting is they're not all agricultural
exporters. So often, we're finding that some colleagues are finding that these
kinds of non-tariff barriers are emerging
not just in the agriculture space, which has been traditionally w- how people,
'cause that's the most protectionist area, but also in the industrial space.
So we're working with colleagues that we wouldn't always work with, um,
to try to bring this agreement, uh, together.
And I think you'll see that working alongside the future investment trade
partnership agreement, uh, ministerial meeting that I talked about,
uh, for next year. So it, this is a really important area of work for us.
It is a significant drag on New Zealand exporters.
Uh, and significant cuts to that, we estimate, could
increase the benefits and the price benefits when using the exports by between 10
and 20%. If you think about some of the tariffs that we're facing,
uh, internationally, this is really a very significant area of work.
Thank you.
All right, look, we are pushing for time, so we'll move to the international policy
session now. Uh, section five,
and first question, the honorable Damien
O'Connor. Kia ora, Mr. Chair. Thank you very much.
Um...
Oh yeah, no one else can come forward?
(laughs)
(laughs) You're on your own, Damien (laughs) .
Kia ora. Look, uh, my question is, uh,
uh, a bit of a specific one. I note the recent, uh,
appointment of, uh, Wendy Matthews
to Canada,
um, taking away from a very important space
in, uh, uh, the
Asian, uh, sector, or I can't, can't think of the
word. You've got titles for them.
North Asia.
North Asia, yeah, so, so, um, uh, which takes away a
significant skill set of hers from that particular region.
My question is, with respect to the Mandarin language training for those in
that sector and the language training, more broadly speaking, in that sector, is
there still significant investment and commitment from MFAT to do
that? Uh, and of course I wish Wendy all the best in Canada.
Yeah. Thanks very much for the question.
Well, I'll ask Graham to address the detail.
But
just zooming out briefly, it's really important in the running of our system
that our staff rotate through different opportunities and that we grow
them and match them to roles offshore.
So we, we have some people who specialize deeply in some areas and stay within
it. But, but most of our foreign policy staff are what we call
generalists, so highly capable. People like Wendy
have spent a lot of their career in the, um, in
Asia. Um, but we have found a new opportunity for her
in Ottawa and it's, that's how we grow people to expand
them. Um, meantime, we will of course ensure that the role she's
vacating is filled by someone highly capable.
Um, this is just how our system works to sustain that, that
throughput, uh, that pipeline of ambassadors and high commissioners.
We will take people out of their roles in Wellington,
put them offshore, but find a good replacement.
On the specifics of Mandarin language training, I'll turn to Graham.
Uh, yeah.
Graham is our deputy secretary for Asia and the Americas.
Yeah, uh, thank you. Uh, thank you, Bedon, and, uh,
thank you, uh, to the committee. Um, just on language training, yes, we do continue
to invest in a, in a significant way in language training, as do some other
government departments which work towards, particularly with, uh, particularly
MPI. Uh, so in respect of China, I actually saw
earlier this week the, uh, the four new, uh,
staff members that we're, uh, about to set off on two years of language
training offshore for Mandarin. Uh, they will be going
into entry level positions across Beijing, Shanghai, and
Guangzhou, in our postings there.
Uh, and we would expect to continue to work on that pipeline
over, over years as we have done to date, to make sure that we still have a good
cohort of staff that give us options across a whole range of different positions.
(laughs)
Next question, Vanushi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, obviously the ministry have an important role to
play in terms of understanding our l- our legal obligations, uh, in
relation to international treaties. I referenced earlier two things.
So the Genocide Convention and our obligations as third
party, uh, but also the ICJ advisory opinion in
relation to the occupied territories.
Um, so the first question is whether advice has been provided to the
minister in regards to our obligations under each of
those?
Sorry.
I, I'm just trying to make sure I, um, have got the,
uh... You're talking about the advisory opinion on the occupied
territories, and what was the other one?
The Genocide Conven- Convention and the duty to prevent,
so third-party obligations under the convention.
Um, I mean, obviously I'm not able to
convey, uh, the legal advice that the-
No.
... ministry is, uh, is giving, and
neither am I, um, necessarily aware of each and
every time, uh, a piece of advice is informed,
um, by our understanding of the, the legal obligations.
Um,
so, uh, I mean, the Genocide Convention has been around,
uh, fortunately for many decades, and it is well
embedded in our understanding
of, uh, not just international law but our
understanding of, uh, our policy
responses as well, um, to evolving situations.
Um, the advisory opinion, um, that you
mention on the occupied territories, uh, is
of course much more recent. I think it was 19 July this year.
Hmm.
Uh, and that, um,
was a, uh, a very useful,
um, explanation of existing
legal obligations. Um, it, uh,
conveyed, uh, which, f- from the ministry's
perspective, an orthodox interpretation, uh, of those
obligations, uh, which of course fall, uh, primarily onto
Israel. Um, so I don't think, uh, i-
that advisory opinion changed, um, our fundamental understanding of the
obligations, uh, in any way, uh, albeit it's
useful to have, uh, have it clarified.
Thank you. That's helpful. Um, I think what I thought was useful about the opinion
was that it had about five pages worth of commentary on
third-party obligations and included quite specific asks.
So, things like ensuring that there wasn't...
that there was non-procurement from Israel that may
facilitate the continuation of the OTs.
Um, and I... so my question is really whether there has been, not the
advice itself, but whether there has been advice on how
we ensure that we're compliant with those quite explicit
directions.
I think on the specifics of our,
um, uh, engagement and advice, uh, with that
part of the world, it would be best to speak to my colleague Paula, the, the deputy
secretary involved. Uh, but,
um,
I, um,
yeah, don't... As I said, um, the understanding
of the legal obligations is infused, um, throughout the advice we
give on a regular basis. And it's not really a particularly
productive conversation to try and zero down on each
instance, um, as to, uh, whether advice has been given.
Also, um, we interact in many different ways, you know?
There are d- discussions, uh, with ministers.
We provide input into emails, uh, and then occasionally there are
specific pieces of legal advice. So, it's a, it's a very complex
kind of moving picture.
Thank you very much. Um, and I think probably the distinction for me is
understanding legal obligations, yes, agreed.
Perhaps the better question is-
Mm-hmm.
... was there advice provided on how to
operationalize, um, that, that
responsibility? So, ensuring that we are compliant with what that has set
out, and that goes beyond legal advice.
It does go to was there advice about operationalizing?
I'm concerned about two things in particular.
One was non-procurement that was mentioned in the report.
The other one was ensuring that security and intelligence
information isn't shared in a way that would be in breach of that
advisory opinion.
So, it may not be a legal... I'm, I'm...
It may not be a question about legal advice-
Mm-hmm.
... but advice about operat- operationalizing,
um, that understanding to ensure that we are compliant.
Well, I can, I can certainly say that, um, ministers were
given, um, information on the
content of that advisory opinion, uh,
and that included, uh, the view that
the, uh, position set out by the court in that
case, uh, were, uh, orthodox and
consistent with, um, New Zealand's understanding of the
obligations that applied.
Next question, Dr. Warren Shin.
Oh, thank you. Um, it's starting off as just a supplementary of
the, um, Vanisha Wilder's question.
I guess in, in that, what you're saying, what sort of
advice or reports have MFAT received from
other, um, I guess,
like-minded countries, let's say Australia, you know, um, EU
and et cetera, around the recognition of Palestine?
Have MFAT received anything?
Well, let me perhaps just answer that in a general way, Mr. Chair.
I mean, it's not really for me to characterize the position of other governments.
It's really for them-
But can
I ask- It's really for them to speak to, uh, to their policy perspectives
on issues rather-
Yeah. ... than have them revealed by me.
But have, but have they... Have you received anything?
Well, th- there is a constant dialogue with other governments-
Okay.
... across the board, across, across all sorts of areas.
But it, it really wouldn't be proper for me to go and to articulate in the view of
another government on their behalf.
Can I then check what, um, advice, if any, has
MFAT provided to the relevant ministers on
the genocide that's currently happening in Darfur or
Al-Fashir in Sudan?
Paula, I'm falling on that topic.
It's obviously
a catastrophic situation in Sudan at the moment, and it's-
it's-
it- it's a very complicated situation.
It's a civil war, but it's not just a civil war, right?
There are external players aggravating the situation.
I don't think specific advice has gone up as to whether there is genocide or not,
and genocide has a very specific definition under
international law. We would be looking to an ICJ decision on
the substance, not just an advisory position, but a, a full decision on the
substance to point us in that direction.
Thank you. Um, actually, just moving on to my primary question, um,
how is the current relationship with, uh, the Cook Islands
and what is MSAT doing to repair some of that relationship?
(laughs)
When the music stops and you don't have a chair-
That's right.
... you're out. (laughs)
Um, thank you very much for the question.
About time the music went.
Um, it's- it's obviously very topical.
Um, uh, I might try and answer it in the broad, um, by setting some
broad context and history, if that would be helpful to the committee, um, because I
don't think it can be kind of captured in a soundbite.
Um,
the first point I think I would make on this, um, and Bernadette will amplify
me and correct, uh, as necessary-
(laughs)
... um, you know, this is a very special relationship,
the New Zealand-Cook Islands relationship.
Um, uh, and that's been affirmed by the Prime Minister, by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, uh, by the Cook Islands Prime Minister.
And it's, the connection's already strong, they're personal, there are
very important iwi links, um, there are people-to-people links.
There's a lot of emotional resonance and long, long may that
continue, that connection between the two peoples, something we-
we are very respectful of and attach a- a lot of importance to.
But
in all that, it's- it's really
important, and I apologize if I'm telling the committee things that
it already knows, but it's really important to remember that this
relationship is constitutionally special as
well. You know, the Cook Islands many years ago
made a free decision, uh, to freely associate
with the realm of New Zealand. So this is not a kind of merger
between two countries. It's Cook Islands deciding to freely
associate with what is known as the realm of New Zealand.
And with that, and I'm sure this informed their- their free decision
at the time, with that comes a lot of benefits.
Um,
uh, Cook Islanders, of course, enjoy New Zealand citizenship,
gives them access to health, education, social
welfare. Of course, gives them rights to- to live in New Zealand,
rights to indeed move to Australia.
Um, so there are all those benefits, which are very important given the very deep
family connections, and as I've said, the iwi connections.
It also gives the Cook Islands a lot of, um, a lot of leeway.
And we've seen their international personality grow over the years.
Um, those of you who might remember, uh, the period in recent years when Prime
Minister Brown was, um, chair of the Pacific Islands Forum and gave him
the opportunity to represent the Pacific on the global stage, and- and in a way
represent the Cook Islands and demonstrate that leeway.
But with those benefits and with that leeway also come responsibilities.
Um, including for the purposes of this
discussion, I think the core responsibility, um,
that's relevant for us, given recent developments
is, is that the Cook Islands is- is enjoining the realm of New
Zealand, is undertaking ru- as part of that not to
act in ways
that are inimical to the security of the realm of New Zealand or New
Zealand itself. And that's a responsibility that's among other things
affirmed in the, uh, in the Cook Islands Constitution
Act. It is fair to say, and I do want to acknowledge
this, that- that what, um, what c- would
constitute
a kind of inimical security act, uh, by the Cook Islands
has been largely unexplored terrain in the history of this
relationship. And when the relationship was last
codified in 2001,
the security landscape was strikingly different,
as you all, as you all know.
So, it's not a relationship which is contemplated deeply
on how to deliver on that shared commitment to the security of the
realm.
And that's the security of New Zealand and the security of the Cook Islands and the
security of them together. And especially given that-
that unexplored terrain, th- this is
why consultation is so important between the two governments.
Um, and that's why cons- consultation
is baked into our relationship understandings
and if I'm right, also, uh, uh, in the, um, in
the Cook Islands Constitution Act.
And it's with sort of a heavy heart and- and more in sorrow than in
anger, um, saying that the Cook Islands did not
consult New Zealand on the agreements it concluded with
China. Um, this whole topic was the subject
of very extensive diplomacy, uh, between the two- the two of
us, uh, throughout 2004. Um,
in early, uh, sorry, 2024. Um,
in early 2025, last- last January, I myself visited
in the interests of- of setting a- a resolution to this issue and fairly
unprecedented that somebody in my role would- would head off on a mission like
that. Um, but nonetheless, that was a- a reference to the
importance the government attached to it.
And the issue is also the subject of quite extensive correspondence between
ministers on both sides. Um, and in a way we thought that had
culminated very satisfactorily when- when Prime Minister Brown last, uh,
November, um, had- had very encouragingly agreed in a
letter
to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, um, that there'd be consultation
with New Zealand.... on the agreements in a way that served
to, to meet our concerns. And in the end, however, that
did not happen, um,
and that has sort of unfolded in ways you will be familiar with.
Um, and it's inevitably had an impact on
the, on the trust that is essential in what I'd call
a constitutionally intimate relationship like this one.
Um, and-
(coughs) ... as you all know, because it's in the public domain, there's been some other
factors which have affected that trust.
(laughs) Cook Islands Shipping Registry,
um, you know, New Zealand has stood
strongly, um, against Russia's
appalling invasion of Ukraine, which has taken a
terrible, terrible impact on human life in that country and
has seen the targeting of
children, schools, kindergartens, hospitals, civilian
infrastructure-
Palestine.
... all sorts of reasons why we have opposed
it. And
if you run a shipping registry that enables flags of
convenience
which enable the, uh, uh, subversion
of sanctions regimes,
whether in respect to Russia or, or, uh, or
Iran,
then
that is both inherently bad but also attaches to the reputation of New
Zealand. So
now the Cook Islands, to be fair, has made some steps, taken some
steps to address that, although those steps are not complete.
There have been other developments.
Um, legislation on cryptocurrency of, of
unclear provenance and, and dubious or, or rather troubling
scope. There was the enterprise to seek a separate Cook Islands
passport that, that came and went. Now these, these...
I'm mentioning these decisions because-
Mm-hmm.
... on, on top of... or these actions, on top of the, the
fundamental issue about consultation, th- these things have introduced friction
into the relationship.
Mm-hmm.
You've, you've seen that with your own eyes.
It's highlighted a gap on what free association means.
Now, this doesn't mean we're not talking to each
other. It doesn't mean that New Zealand has stopped providing
generous assistance to the Cook Islands.
It has caused an element of it, and I think you've alluded to that.
And it certainly doesn't change the profound connections between the two
peoples on both sides, um, and so we will keep
engaging. Um, uh, for as
long as the free association relationship exists and, and we want
it to exist, we need to make it work.
And so we will keep working hard at that.
Just one step
So, I'm sorry for the lengthy prologue-
Yeah.
... but I thought it was an important piece of context.
Just one step on that then. What specific conditions then does the Cook
li- Islands must meet before funding support resumes?
Well, a- as I have said, um, trust has been
affected. So-
That's hard-
... in a way it's, it's not-
...
conditio- Eh, I'm sorry?
Well, I was gonna say, that would be a hard condition to measure.
Like, is there a specific tangible things?
I don't think it's helpful to the resolution of the situation for me to, to air
publicly what specific steps need taking.
That's a matter for ongoing discussion between us and the Cook Islands.
Okay.
Supplementary, Laura McClure.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, um, for coming to the committee today.
In your opinion, do you think there is more that
MFAT could have done over the past
five, 10 years to ensure that the
situation didn't occur-
Mm-hmm.
... in the first place? Or do you...
are you confident that you have done everything
possible, um, to ensure that the breakdown in relationship
to this point hadn't occurred or...
and, for example, that you weren't sprung
by the agreement with, um, China? Do you think...
I guess, it's a, it's a bit of a reflection thing.
Do you think there was more that you could have done?
When, when, when you look back with 20/20 hindsight and you look at the laydown
of events that we have before us today, of course you reflect on whether
things could have been done differently.
And it's, it's possible that they could have been.
But when I think about the, you know, I alluded to the very sort of
strenuous efforts that we've made, um,
in the past, uh, year or two, um,
and when I reflect that those strenuous efforts ha- appear to
had reached a point where our friends in the Cook
Islands had agreed to engage on the agreements,
then I think that in turn is a reflection that, that New Zealand's diplomacy at
that point appeared to have ha- appeared to have delivered.
Um, but we, we can't ourselves take responsibility for every action that the Cook
Islands takes. All we can do is do what would, what we must
do.
All right. Next question, Honorable Peeni Henare.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. My question is broadly across the Pacific.
There are some very clear actions, and I, I congratulate
the work on security of fishing stocks, et cetera.
Um, but are you satisfied the priorities are in the right area
given what seems to be the regress of democracy
across the Pacific, which is a challenge that many of our diaspora
here, or those countries' diaspora here in New Zealand continue to
contact us about?
I'll, I'll get Bernadette to address the Pacific, the, the, the specifics of the
Pacific question. Um, you know, our development program seeks to
achieve a range of goals in the region, and it's always gonna be a question of how
we, we balance those goals with one another.
But I'll, I'll turn to Berna- Bernadette
Yeah. Thank you. It's a great question, and you're right.
It's something that we're asked about, and it was actually fantastic to see the
delegation from Vanuatu-
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. ... here this morning. It's a really good initiative.
So, with our development program we have kind of four priority framework
areas, and the first is around governance and democracy and institutions
'cause that for us is like the bedrock that underpins so much of the rest
of the development that goes on. We also have a priority around security, and
that's the broader sense of, um, security, whether that be,
um, uh, policing security through to climate-...
security. We have one around climate adaptation and one around
social and economic resilience. So, we have been putting
quite a lot, actually, we've been putting increasing effort into some
of the institution building, uh, work.
And we do that through a whole range of areas, and that's everything from sort of a
persis- um, civic justice program where, um,
uh, colleagues, and in fact, um, a number of New Zealand judges do
support mentoring and advisory to support kind of at that
level, to support parliamentary systems and
programs. And then also to support, um, uh, government
agencies and actually how, how they're working.
Everything from sort of, um, writing of legislation and,
um, audit. Uh, there's really good coo- cooperation with the-
Yeah.
... um, auditor general's office in New Zealand out into the Pacific.
So, kind of all those elements of what makes up a, um, I guess a
thriving democracy we are trying to support. But you, you're right.
It's an area that's under, it's under pressure and so it's something that we'll be
keeping investing in.
I'll look into supplementary if I may, Mr. Chair.
Um, well, it's more a statement. I'd encourage more of that.
I'd love to, in a year's time, for us to sit down again in this forum and
say things have got better.
Mm. Yeah.
You know what? We will have that opportunity.
(laughs)
(laughs) Looking forward to it already. (laughs)
Uh, but look, I just want to follow on that too, off the back of Vanuatu's recent
decision. Um, can you give us some insight around the potential impact that might
have for the work we're trying to support there?
Um, and so-
Sorry, the decision in terms of, uh, not allowing co-location of, uh,
foreign staff in any of their ministries, departments, defense, et
cetera. Uh, so obviously that impacts a lot of work New Zealand's
doing.
Yeah, it does. And, um, we're still working through that with
Vanuatu, uh, government officials to actually fully
understand just quite what it was that they had in mind and
quite how they're going to implement that.
And it, and it appears that there are still some questions, um,
about that. And I guess if you're standing back, you're seeing it from their
perspective as they're trying to make sure that, um, they don't come under undue,
undue pressure, uh, from different countries and different partners.
But I think in their effort to maybe do that, they hadn't quite understood that
for sort of longstanding programs where we might have, um,
technical advisors and police advisors working with them, that that would also
impact that. So, that's what we're talking through with the Vanuatu government now
to try and hopefully find a way through that.
Okay, so still work in progress.
Work in progress.
Thank you. Our next question is from Tim Costley.
How do you, um, in, in the
complexity of international diplomacy at the moment, how do
you measure progress? How do you measure success?
And, and, and how do you communicate, I guess, that when we look
back the year, to assess if it's effective, if it's
meaningful, if it's delivering for those strategic ends that we
talked about earlier?
Yep. Thanks for the question. Something very much on our minds.
Um, some of our work lends itself to
objective and immediate evaluation.
So, you can, um... It's objectively visible if
you've concluded a free trade agreement.
You know that it's done.
Mm.
Yeah. Uh, you can measure, um, consular
satisfaction rates as we do, 'cause we poll that every single
year. Uh, so the- those examples of things which are quite
tangible and quite visible, and so we obviously can do measure those, and those are
reflected in our annual report.
Yep.
A lot of our interventions don't lend themselves to that.
So, if we take, um... The EU FTA is quite a good
example. So, that is now, you know, that is now, um,
implemented and flourishing.
It took four years to negotiate, so over that
four-year period, pretty hard to arrive at,
um, objective measures of success in a context where
nothing is gonna be agreed till everything is agreed.
So, you've got that four-year period, and before that four-year period,
you've got many years of what I would call
investing diplomatic capital in our relationship with the European
Union to trigger
the commencement of negotiations.
So, that is the reason, um, that in our annual report
we, we have a mix of qualitative and quantitative
measures. It's also the reason we've started to introduce, um,
into the report case studies which take a
relationship which is on the cusp of taking off.
So, a very good example of that is India.
So, if you think about the huge investment the government has made in lifting that
relationship, and the annual report has a case study which says, "These are things
we did
to, to deliver the results we want in the long term."
Now, in areas where we are spending, you know, very significant
amounts of taxpayers' money, and that's obviously most salient in the aid
program, we have the practice of formal evaluation of, of our
interventions to ensure that they are delivering value for money.
So, in those kind of areas, again, you've got, you've got that ability of
having objective and tangible measures to look at.
Yeah. Um, one thing I'd add just to that is also we do have, in terms of our
core focus areas and delivery, um, performance, independent
assessment. So, we're obviously very much focused on policy
delivery. Uh, and so we get our quality policy
advice, um, assessed every year. Uh, and usually, uh, by
the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research.
Or, uh, but we're usually very high up that, that, uh, uh, those
measures as well. I think this year we were first.
So, um, qualitative, quantitative, and independent assessment tend
to be the three platforms we use to assess our, our, our performance.
So, a lot of what you do is through relationship.
Uh, when we talked earlier about,
uh...... for example, it
might be the Southwest Pacific, it might increase right into the
Indo-Pacific. Uh, a lot of what you're doing isn't just about
delivering aid, providing a bunch of services.
There is just some relationship building so that we have influence, we're storing
diplomatic capital so that the day we need it, it's there, we've got support, we've
got friends, we've got partners. How do you, how do you sort of
measure and assess how that is going?
And, and, and how do you reflect back on the year that has been
in terms of how, how you've progressed?
Yeah. So we have, um,
obviously the cascade of our strategic objectives down through our, and our,
our
priority, the, the reset priorities-
Yes.
... the focal areas they cascade down into unit and individual plans so you've
got a feedback mechanism there. But really the test for knowing whether or
not you've delivered
on that
accrual of capital over time, and that's not just something
that is done by diplomats. It's done by members of parliament when they
travel, it's done by ministers, uh, it's done by our business
people, it's done culturally.
Yep.
The test is when you have an ask to make, when you have
a favor to request, when you've got an FTA you want to
launch, are you doing so on the basis of a
thickened-
Hmm.
... broad-based, well-developed relationship?
That's ultimately when you know. Challenging, because that can take years
to accrue.
And, and, and the secret was just how did you, how do you rate,
how does this year rate?
Against our against our goals?
Yeah, give a, give a-
With respect to the target?
...
Yeah, sure. Um,
well, we think, um, so if you look at h- uh, I guess the most immediate way
we've, we've tried to measure ourselves is against, um, our three
medium term priority areas, um, and our foreign policy reset
objectives. Uh, so we've, what we've tried to do is, because there's so much
overlap between those two sets of performance measures if you like,
we've drilled them down into five sort of strategic
priorities. Uh, and we've, we, we can probably get into this a little bit if
you want to, but we have sort of stock taked against some of the achievements we've
made against those priorities. Uh, and we think we've done reasonably
well, um, against them. Uh, if you look at some of the highlights,
which, a lot of which have been discussed by the committee, um, against those five
priority areas, which are, which are largely the, the foreign policy reset area,
delivery areas.
I mean, if you looked at one of the government's biggest priorities, which is
intensifying our effort in Asia, and you looked at the,
um, you know, the panoply of strategic partnerships that have been
agreed, um, with ASEAN as a whole as I referred earlier and to
some of the bilateral ones, those were targets we set for ourselves.
They sit in our planning documents at the beginning of the year and they've been
hit or very good progress has been made on
them.
And as the secretary said, they're also reflected at a post level and a unit
planning level. So we also have a clear mechanism or set of
mechanisms whereby we can measure the delivery by individual units and individual
posts. Um, which is really important for us to keep
measuring, uh, you know, our ability to deliver and where we might
need to, to change or change direction or, or reassess what our resource
settings are.
Further, further complicating a challenging area, of course, is that as we all
know, the world's not standing still on us.
And we are both delivering on long run, uh, goals
while also being swide swiped, sideswiped periodically by global
events over which we have no control.
And so we're also, you know, in this game of, of long-term
achievement while also having to execute tactical response day in, almost
every single day. Such as the turbulent nature of the
world.
Next question, Vanisha Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have two very quick fire, hopefully, um,
policy questions. The first is on the Crimes Against Humanity
Treaty, which has obviously been negotiated into next year.
Is our current position that we would support the inclusion of gender
apartheid, is, within the treaty, is the first question.
The second is, I noticed that we abstained in a, uh, an
UNGA vote on the Golan Heights, which I thought was
extremely unusual. I'm getting a-
We voted in favor, the one that was last night?
Yes.
We voted in favor.
Okay. So there's-
We're very clear on that.
There's potentially some misinformation out there then on that.
(laughs)
Oh, a little thought.
That one, that one felt nice, nice either way.
Or you were just wrong. 'Cause extreme right, extreme right.
Okay.
(laughs) Gosh, how rare.
On your first question, I, I don't have the answer.
Victoria, um, May?
Yes. Um, the, uh, negotiation of the Crimes
Against Humanity Treaty is at a very early stage.
Uh, the first, uh, meeting will happen early
next year, and we envisage that will be, uh,
primarily procedural, as is often the case, um, when these things get off the
ground. Uh, but there is a good basis for work
in the draft articles provided by the International Law Commission.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so we are still at an early stage
in, um, establishing exactly, uh,
what, uh, New Zealand's, uh, preferences for
the treaty will be. Um, and we will envisage
that wouldn't be till, um, m- maybe, maybe a year
out from now. Um, in general, we want to
see the treaty succeed. Uh, we do think there is a
gap in the international legal framework.
Uh, you know, in that there is no specific, um,
treaty on crimes against humanity, although there is a significant amount
of customary international law in this area.
And also for those, um, states parties party to the Rome
Statute for the International Criminal Court, there is substantial
coverage. Uh, the draft articles, uh, already
contain, uh, suggested, um,
crimes, uh, that touch on
gender aspects, if you like. Um, there are, uh,
particular crimes around, uh, persecution
on grounds of gender, and then many of the,
um-... uh, sexual harm crimes,
uh, are included. Uh, so, um,
it's not yet, um, apparent whether there will be a push to
include, uh, something specific in the nature of
gender apartheid as such, uh, but we are confident
that, uh, the- the range of crimes that
tend to be, uh, brought together under that umbrella,
uh, will indeed, uh, likely be- be in the draft text.
But there is yet no text. Uh, their countries are being, uh, negotiating
on, um, so we're- we're- we're participating,
uh, and, uh, we'll be engaging, uh, with interest in all these
matters.
Just a quick sup. Are there other countries that are advocating for the
inclusion of a gender apartheid
term within the context of the treaty?
I- I think there's a lot of, um, a lot of talk, uh, in
a range of circles as is often the case, uh, with these things.
Countries will have mostly, uh, indicated their
views on this in the context of the annual debate in
Six Committee about the International Law Commission's work,
uh, so there may well be, uh, references in some of those
statements, uh, to the idea that, uh, the concept
of, uh, gender apartheid could- could be included.
Uh, I'm not across all the detail there, uh, but I- but I do
know the negotiations are at a very early stage,
uh, and there will be time, uh, to consider, uh, as,
uh, countries put in suggestions for what the first text should
be.
Supplementary, Tim Costin.
Ca- can I just ask a- a really genuine question about
that? 'Cause I'm- I'm not across all the detail on this, but terms
like gender apartheid, and- and we see other ones, you know,
the- the technical definitions of say genocide compared to maybe the perception
of what people think maybe back World War II and things like
that. Um, is there a bit of a
trend or is it just perception in the community that these terms start to become a
bit more extreme? And can that kinda undermine the genuine
efforts that I- I think Ms. Wilders is getting at, to actually make a meaningful
difference for where there is, um, set some examples of terrible and
poor treatment of people? Or- or is that just actually a really
sensible term to use?
Uh,
I- I think- I think you're right, that it is- it is one of
these emerging kind of umbrella concepts that is used
in debates and discussions. Uh, I don't think
there is a clearly established legal
crime of gender apartheid, uh, so it's probably got
some rhetorical elements. Uh, another topic that
we hear about frequently is the concept of
ecocide, uh, as a crime, and you hear more about
that from those that would like to develop and evolve the
law, um, but then of course, there are indeed some very
serious international crimes that relate to harm from the
environment.
Yeah.
Supplement- quick supplementary on that 'cause I think it's useful.
Um, my understanding is that there- there is potentially an
actus reas gap in terms of what the ICC can look at,
um, on gender-based crimes, and that's the objective.
Meeting what is a gap in international law, not
creating a new overarching crime, um, but actually
addressing an actus reas gap. Is- is that
correct?
I don't, uh, think that the content of the
future Crimes Against Humanity Treaty will have a direct read
across, uh, to what is or is not within the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.
Uh, so the International Criminal Court will be, uh,
subject to the- the Rome Statute. There are from time to
time, uh, suggestions that the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court should be expanded, uh,
but, uh,
none of those, uh, suggestions seem particularly
likely, uh, in the current, uh, international environment.
And the Court, uh, which has got its, uh, meeting of- the
annual meeting of the states parties to the Court is taking place in The
Hague, uh, this week, uh, and, um,
the 125 member states of the Court, uh,
primarily focused on trying to provide the Court the support it needs
to function under its existing mandate.
Thank you.
All right, I just want to come back to the Pacific, and obviously it's a focus area
at the moment-
Mm-hmm.
... and it's an area where we've seen the Foreign Minister invest a lot of
time over the last calendar year, uh, visiting
all bar one of the PIF nations. Um, a- a big increased
effort there which I think is great and then coming to Ms.
McClure's point earlier, I think you could
argue, or my view would be, we perhaps haven't had that
focus, uh, over preceding period of time
for indeed, uh, perhaps at times taking some of those relationships for granted.
It feels like that has shifted now and there is a renewed focus there, so I'm
really interested in perhaps a bit of an oversight or overview of
what we've achieved, some of the key wins diplomatically over
the- the year in review and the period up until now as
well. Supplementary.
(?) , please.
(laughs)
(laughs) Um, yeah, look, thank you, and it's- it's quite
hard to know where to almost break into it because as you said, there's just so
much that now is going on in the Pacific, both going on in the Pacific and what we
are trying to do in the Pacific, and I think that's probably the second part that's
been, um, uh, quite, uh, important.
Um, in terms of the framing that Bed gave right at the front of sort of what we'll
be doing bilaterally, um, you're right, Mr.
Chair, I think one of the key things is actually been going out and actually
getting into every single country bar one, and that one is, uh, on
our radar for, uh, shortly.
And-I don't think we can underestimate the importance of
actually traveling and turning up, and actually going to somebody else's home
and engaging with them on their, on their ground and, um, and in
their way. And so, I think that has set a really kind of, uh,
solid, um, platform for then everything that we have
been wanting to achieve, whether it be regionally or whether it be
multilaterally after that. And I should say that
one of the things that I think has really resonated, resonated, going
to, um, Mr. Henare's point earlier about democracy, has been doing
a lot of travel with cross-party delegations.
Yeah. Sure.
Actually, that has been super powerful-
Sure.
... and, and you have seen it yourself of, and many of the comments from our
colleagues from the other side of the table, like they couldn't imagine traveling
with members of the opposition-
Mm-hmm.
... from across parliament. But that is the demonstration, actually, this is what a
democracy is. You know, you-
Mm-hmm. ... can be on either side, and you're still contributing, uh, to the country.
So I think at the bilateral level, things have been going
pretty, uh, pretty well and pretty strong.
Um, at the regional level, the
Pacific Islands Forum has had a, um...
I guess there's been some, uh, some good focus areas,
some good, um, positive momentum as we're trying to
strengthen the organization and embed this concept of PIF
centrality. Um, but as an organization is also coming
under, um, quite a lot of pressure because there is so much
interest and attention from outside the region on the Pacific.
And I think that is one of the hardest things is how do countries actually
respond to that, and what is their, uh, what is
almost their absorptive capacity to be able to cope with all the interest and
attention? And that's been something that we're, we're quite focused
on, and also wanting to make sure that we don't sort of contribute to
that. And that's one of the reasons we're also really, um,
promoting the forum, in that we're trying to encourage other
countries to engage through the forum rather than trying to engage bilaterally with
all the different countries who many of them just can't really cope with, you know,
15 different missions turning up.
I mean, I think sometimes it's good for us to just remember, like, um,
the foreign ministry of Kiribati is 10 people, like literally 10 people, so
less than this room.
So trying to actually deal with everything from a vote in the United Nations on the
Golan Heights through to us turning up, uh, on a development
program, um, and they also cover immigration, it's just so
vast. So actually how we engage is almost just as important
as what we do, and how do we actually make sure that we are being supportive in
what we're trying to do and try and lift, um, lift, uh, them
up, um, as well? So, I think we've got some good wins
there. We're focusing in now on the regional
thinking of Palau as the next chair of the Pacific Islands Forum, and then it will
be New Zealand. So New Zealand will move on to the forum, forum, um, QUOICA
mechanism from the forum later this year, and then we'll be there for three years.
We're hoping to get to Palau fairly soon as well, to be able to engage with them
and think about, well, what, what sort of, um, ideas, projects
could we do that would give continuity across our, across that three-year
period? So starting with Palau and then moving on to us, and then for the third
host that hasn't been, um, decided yet.
So, so I think there, there's some wins, but gosh, there's a lot to do as
well.
I, I-
It can just go so many places. Yes.
Thanks Bernadette, and while Bernadette was speaking, I was also thinking of some
of the practical things that have happened in the course of the year.
One I wouldn't want people to lose, um, sight of was the
support New Zealand provided for Samoa to host the Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting last year, which was inside our planning year.
Um, I think this was the largest peacetime deployment of civilians by
New Zealand-
Yeah. ... offshore, um, to deliver a major inter-governmental meeting and
to deliver in a way that was respectful to Samoa.
Um, another really, um, perhaps, perhaps not widely heralded, but
important achievement which spoke to New Zealand's mana and
respect was hosting, um, uh, at
Burnham, a meeting of the government of Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville
government, uh, to address the, um, the
enduring, you know, uh, constitutional question between the two of
them. And that was obviously presided over by Sir Jerry Mateparae,
but Burnham obviously has, um, deep resonance
for, um, both parties and for us. That's the site of the Burnham talks in the late
1990s. Um, there was the response to the Vanuatu earthquake,
which was, was prompt and efficient and generous.
Um, initiatives that we're doing with Australia, it's a vital
partner for us in the Pacific. So the, um, New
Zealand decision to join the Australian Policing Support Program in
the Pacific, uh, the fact that we have been,
um, n- named chair of the Pacific Islands Forum.
Now, there's a certain rotational inevitability to that, but it also does
speak to the respect in which we're held in the region.
So there are these long-run challenges, which is what the long-run
interventions of the development program are about.
But there are points of light along the way about things we're achieving year in,
year out.
Excellent. Supplementary to Clarence, Yu-nan.
Um, thank you. Can I just check with you, and it's really heartening to see
in terms of the, the move around the Pacific Island Forum, um,
the nuance that you have expressed before in terms of our unique
relationship with Cook Islands, but also NIU.
Yes.
Um,
is that something that is understood by the other
Pacific Islands in the Pacific Island Forum?
And if so, can I just check what has been the
perception if there's any sort of chilling effect, you know, we cut funding
and, you know, the back and forth, uh, has a- been expressed by other Pacific
Islands in that forum?
Thank you. Back to Simon then please again chime in.
Um, well again, I'm going to be careful about imputing views to other countries at
a specific level, but I'll try and answer the issue, answer the question
generically. Um, I think there is some understanding a-
around the Pacific, um...... of the, the, the
constitutional niceties of the relationship with the Cook Islands.
And I think the further you get away from Polynesia, I suspect the less
nuanced or developed that understanding is.
Um, in terms of, um, Pacific attitudes
towards this development, I mean I think, again, those Pacific Island
countries that are familiar
with our free association relationship with the Cooks, I think
some are quite envious of it because they see it as, um,
something to be highly prized to be able to enjoy the
connectivity to New Zealand that the Cook Islands enjoys as a result of being
in free association. Um, uh,
at a generical level, I'm not aware of any sort of particular concern.
I mean, obviously everyone in the region, including us, would rather this problem
was resolved.
Mm.
But I'm not aware of any particular, uh, particularly sort of acute points being
made to us by colleagues around the Pacific.
And just one other question around the fact that yes, there is gonna be, and we're
gonna be seeing increasing level of interest in the Pacific Islands from various
countries, so
... And the Pacific Island Forum is one avenue for that, of having something
together. But what other advice or what other works is being done by MFAT
to
essentially work with the Pacific Islands on, let's be honest, the
two main interested parties in the Pacific, being the US and
China?
Wha- what work's being done by them or by us?
By MFAT. Because, you know, if you have
these large powers globally that are interested in the Pacific Islands
and you are already making some moves around like, well, different
countries won't be able to handle it in terms of all of these int- interests, we
th- recommend going through Pacific Island Forum, what other work is in fact
being done to address the attention by both US and
China on the Pacific Islands?
I mean, there's a, there's a fundamental principle here which is it's for each
Pacific Island country to determine its own, you know, the on- the, the
priority it wants to attach, not just to those two relationships, but to many
other big ones as well. I mean, you have the European Union-
Yes, of course. Yeah.
... you have France, you have Korea, Japan, Australia, naturally.
Um, so the first point of principle is it's for those Pacific Island countries to
determine with whom they want to engage.
Um, New Zealand provides advice and support on a bilateral level about that,
um,
uh, especially when it's asked for.
Mm.
Okay. We'll move on now to the international development cooperation
section.
Mm-hmm.
Members have questions under that?
Honorable Peeni Henare.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
the IDC in the Pacific, and we've sort of brushed a little bit of it in some of
the responses that you've already made in, uh, talking
specifically about the increasing need for that parti-
that, you know, for that kind of support there.
Mm-hmm.
Um, that's the first part of the question, is obviously we, we do
fair amount, but over the past year, you will have no doubt had far
more expression, uh, of interest than we've got funds
to support. But the other part of my question is about the work that we
do together with Australia to make sure that we know collectively that money's
going to the right thing-
Mm-hmm.
... or to the right kaupapa that we can both work collectively on.
Um, just some insight into that would be great.
Just on the, on the first one, I just wasn't sure what your question was s-
Uh, well, so obviously-
So- ... there's greater demand than we have in terms of money.
Yeah.
And so I'm just wanting to make sure that, you know, I wanna acknowledge that it's
good stuff.
Two, you know, making sure we're, we're getting the best bang for buck.
Yeah. Right.
And then the other part is, what we do collectively with Australia as we look
towards the IDC and, and how we-
Oh. ... contribute to the Pacific. Thanks (laughs)
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Great, thank you. Um, and look, y- you're right.
There, there's, um, there is extraordinary need from across the Pacific.
There are genuine development, uh, uh, challenges, um,
everything from the, the very large population states of the Papua New Guinea
through to the, um, the small but highly vulnerable states like say
Tuvalu. So it, it sort of, it covers everything.
That's where probably our frameworks are really important, um, in
order to ensure that when we are making investments they're actually, they are
making a difference and they're kind of coherent.
Because it would be very easy to just sort of do basically-
Oh,
sure. Yeah. ... little bits of everything. And that's one of the things that we have been,
um, working on. In 20, uh, 24 we did sort of a review
of our entire development, um, program.
And we, uh, looked at every activity to test it with sort
of alignment, um, against government priorities and that, and, and
effectiveness really that it was doing the right thing.
And that review, it probably told us really that
we're doing too many things in too many places with too many partners.
And so since then, we've been doing a big bit of work about, okay, how
do we kind of re-, uh, realign the, the development
program into doing some smaller number of
activities. But maybe doing them hopefully better.
Um, and we're then organizing ourselves to be able to
deliver on that. So what that means is we kind of, we've making
sure that everything we do fits into the Ministry's strategic framework so we have
to be actually supporting New Zealand's goals in the world.
And we c- we do that. And then we step down below that.
We have a, um, a international cooperation for effective and sustainable
development policy that sort of, uh, it guides us.
But then importantly below that we have 20 plans.
So these are like, uh, country plans.
So we will have a, a country plan say with, um, uh, with, uh,
Tuvalu. And it will determine
basically what we and that government agree are the
priorities and how we will deliver that.
And the important part of the plan is it's actually, it deals with foreign policy,
it deals with trade policy, it deals with everything in relation to that country
which tries to address a little bit of this, um, absorptive
capacity thing. So it's an agreement between us about what we think are the
important things that we can help deliver, um, for that particular
country. And then-... in that, it might be that a
country asks us for something in particular, um, uh, but
we go, "Well, actually that's sort of not a strength of ours.
What would be a strength of ours might be, um, crop support or annual
agriculture." So, we kind of make sure that we're then doing things that also play
to our advantages. And, and that's where their priorities
framework comes in around governance and democracy and other things.
So, it's quite a sort of a structured and layered approach.
But you raise a really important issue around the how do we make sure we're
coordinating with others? So, we spend quite a lot of time,
principally with Australia. I would have, um
... Members of our team will be talking on the phone to Australian counterparts
literally every day, and probably multiple members of my team
across the various elements. And we're doing a lot.
We, we're either working out what we can do together or what we're going to do
complementary wise. So, um, for example, in the Solomon Islands, we've
got a big education program which we've been working on for 40 years now.
It's one of those ones where we've said, "Okay, we've got expertise, carry on.
Don't come up with something new, keep going." But what we've agreed with Australia
is we will focus on the curriculum, uh, and some of the people
development, and Australia's going to focus on the infrastructure.
So it's like-
So it's a good way, exactly.
Yeah. I remember when I was there, I think they did it.
Yeah.
When I was-
Precisely. So, it's sort of trying to, you know, again play to our, play to our
respective, um, strengths. But the other, um, point you made
was about how do we attract in others from outside?
And that's a really critical part, and it's certainly something that, uh, Mr.
Peters and prime minister and other ministers have been doing around all their
travels, um, out of the region is saying,
um, there is opportunity. Don't forget about the
Pacific. It's important that you're there, and actually some fairly
small amounts in your terms can make a really big difference, but when you
do engage, try engage through the forum or come and talk to us as a
partner. Don't just turn up with a part- particular idea because you happen to
be really good at, I don't know, building a sea wall or something.
Don't just turn up and sort of offer that.
Just come and actually talk and actually listen to what your partners
want. So, it's a kind of multi-pronged approach
to try to meet as many of the development needs as we can.
Right. Supplementary, Tim Cosgrove?
Um, one of the things that the committee's heard about recently in some different
hearings has been the branding of aids through the
Pacific.
Yeah.
And how that might contrast to other countries.
Hmm. Mm-hmm.
Yes. Hmm. Um, and, and I understand-
(laughs) ... the rationale for not wanting to do everything through a New Zealand
contract or business necessarily, that there are
we wanna achieve the best, um, ends with, with the means that we
have. But can you just tell us how we're getting
the, um, the branding from that, and if it's not physically branded, are we
going and putting up signs everywhere to say, "This is a New Zealand aid project?"
Yes.
Yeah.
What recognition? Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, it's a, it's a good question, and it is one I have heard from a number
of you. (laughs)
(laughs)
(laughs) (laughs) (laughs) Yeah. Um, in, including ministers as well.
Um, and we are actually looking again at our, at our, uh, branding
and visibility guidelines, um, to see if they're kind of fit for purpose in a more
contested environment, shall we say.
Um, and it's, it's, um, it's quite a challenging one because you're right, you
don't necessarily just wanna go and kind of whack a silver fern on everything
you've done. And depending on of course what it is that you're doing, that may or
may not be appropriate. For example, if we're assisting Tonga build the Parliament
buildings, the last thing you want is your Parliament buildings with another
country's sort of logo on. So, it is finding ways-
Design them like a fern.
(laughs) Yeah. Well, hey, wait. You're coming through.
(laughs)
No, please don't open that design again.
Um, so we are trying to think about how do we do things sensitively that
also makes sure that the recipient is acknowledging
it but isn't feeling kind of like obliged
or isn't, you know-
Is, is she also proud of it? So, one of the ones that I actually quite like
that Japan does where they kind of have two countries flags side-by-side,
so it shows that it's kind of a partnership thing.
So, we are looking quite a lot about the branding side.
But I think there's another whole piece of work which we are doing and probably
doing a little bit better, is actually how we are communicating about
what we're doing.
And in the Pacific, your main channels for that
are social media and probably largely Facebook, to be honest.
So, trying to actually do a more and more
deliberately ab- about talking about what New Zealand is doing and how we're
working together and what we're partnering with.
So, actually
also having other people tell our story, which is probably all most more
powerful than us telling our own story is having our friends in countries
saying, "Look at this amazing thing that New Zealand has supported us
with. Look at this. I'm a returning scholar, uh,
and this is the opportunity that I had." So, actually using
communications channels as well as the kind of the physical
branding.
And, and the dual flag thing i- is smart.
I, I always found and maybe through defense, but the, the
kiwi, the simple black and white kiwi that we may or may not have sprayed on a
bunch of Australian stuff as well.
(laughs)
But, but something as simple as that-
Yeah.
... that you can literally do in a few seconds with a can of spray paint-
(laughs)
... but that actually just sends a really important message.
And, and I take her point that it's not always appropriate but, but I guess one of
the concerns was where there is a contractor from another country doing the
work-
Yeah.
... we would wanna make sure that the recognition goes
the right way.
Where it should go. Yes.
That's exactly right. And what we also do
is-
Oh, ƒ Excuse me. ... um, build into contracts what the branding can be,
so that the contractor can't put their country's branding on
because where they happen to have come from, uh, it has to be the sort of the
donor's, um, branding. So, that's been an area of work
particularly with the, the big multilateral development banks that there's been a
lot of work Australia and New Zealand have done to-
Right.
... ensure that some of the practices that had started to creep in
are no longer creeping in.
Perfect.
Supplementary, Vanishaw.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Tim took my question
(laughs) uh, so I might ask a different primary if that's
okay-
Um,
no- ... Mr. Chair? Or you got Alan
Yep, I've got you on the queue for that, yep.
Um, I just had one in relation to the IDC.
Um, just keen to get an understanding, it's page 55 of the report
around the number of people directly benefiting from improved infrastructure and
services. So, over the last few years we've had 136,000,
64,000, 45,000. Now we're 2.2 million and
it's a massive escalation, I'm interested to understand-
Yes, we've had a very good year.
Yeah.
(laughs)
Yeah. So is that
supporting the Vanuatu earthquake response?
Is it those sorts of, how we suddenly ramp up scale or- or what is
leading to a significant escalation?
Yep. No, and actually I-
Yeah. ... did notice that and I forgot to ask my team yesterday.
I'll come back to you on that. I think it is because we have changed
the way we have measured and we've used some different international data than we
had used in the past.
Okay.
But I'll come back and clarify that for-
All right.
... the committee.
Yep, appreciate that.
Mm-hmm.
And then just on the questions we had around the IDC from-
both Peninara and Tim Costly, also interested to
understand if there's any review of the types of programs we are
funding as well.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Uh, appreciating that obviously we want to make sure we understand the need in each
of those countries we're working with-
Yeah.
... but in a time where there are increasing, um,
increasingly number of other parties interested in this sort of thing as well and
into the brand- branding piece as well.
Yeah.
You know, some of the governance and democracy aspects are really important-
Mm-hmm.
... but they're not necessarily seen by people in country and I'm just
wondering whether we c- uh, consider the tangible a-
um, aspects or the view from the citizens in the country of the support provided
by New Zealand,
when we're making some of those funding decisions as well?
Yeah.
The- Yep. No, look, it's a, it's a excellent point and this is sometimes one
of our conundrums is you can do
some super important and good work on capacity
building and institutions, but nobody sees it
compared to the sports stadium down the road.
And it's, uh, it's a real, it's a real issue
that we face all the time, but I think there's space to
do both because you- you still need to be doing the
lifting of the people because that is ultimately how you will lift countries up and
how you will get your, um, your democracy and your economic prosperity and
ultimately for them, hopefully not having to rely on development assistance.
Um, but there is also quite a lot of space to
do things that do hearts and minds, and one of the things we're
focusing a bit more on is community-based projects 'cause
some of those are actually the most tangible and personable, whether it be, um,
whether it be, um,
sports equipment or cr- books, exercise
books or water tanks, um, and
ablution blocks in schools, particularly for women.
Some of those are actually making huge differences to the lives of individuals that
then all their families know about as well.
So, I think there is the real, um, the real opportunity to
do both and at the other end, we do do some big scale like, um, say Beso
Hospital in, um, Kiribati. So, a- a big brand new
hospital which is very impressive and actually that's an excellent example of that
cooperation, um, where we've built it and Japan
is doing the inside of it, putting in the equipment of it.
So, that's kind of a perfect example of us playing to our respective strengths and
us acknowledging what we can do and- and Japan coming in and working with us, so
trying to find those opportunities as well.
Excellent. Uh, now interested in the, um, procurement piece as
well. So, the Economic Development Minister recently
announced that there would be an increased emphasis put on, uh, the direct
economic benefit for New Zealand-
Yeah.
... in terms of all of the wider benefit being a 10% consideration.
How does that fit within decisions that
MFAT makes from a funding allocation perspective?
Yeah.
There are a number of-
... business
(cheers)
... in New Zealand that could potentially or may wish to pitch for
opportunities in delivering these aid programs into the Pacific.
Yeah.
Does that alter your consideration there or how does that-
Yeah, look, we are looking at that and we're talking through with, um...
I know it's not, it doesn't matter.
We're talking with MB about it, about how the new
requirements fit against our appropriation, our
cabinet policy guidance and also the
purpose of development assistance, which might be to lift the capacity in local
countries. So, just how we are marrying that up.
Um, often development programs are exempt from some of those criteria
such as the Australian one, um, so we're just working through with
MBIE to understand it, uh, fully, but
completely take the point about actually the importance of New Zealand companies
being actually able to operate in the Pacific and there've been some really good
examples, particularly in the infrastructure space actually, we were making some
really good gains into Polynesia in particular
and that's something we are spending more time on and we do, um,
what we call the Pacific Update series where we go around the country to about sort
of 15, 16 different locations and actually just talk about what it is we do
to try to make sure companies and individuals
understand that there could be opportunities and make sure they know to look on the
GETS websites. They go and kind of come and talk to us about what we
might be doing so that people can at least know about it and hopefully put
in some, put in some bids for some of them.
And I think we- we're making some good inroads there, but there's always more we
can do.
Okay. Can you please inform the committee when you get to the position where you
know what that-
Yes, we will know what the decision is, yep.
Thank you. A supplementary, Laura McLeod.
Um, yes, so just to build on that a little bit, I do...
I mean, I'm an SME spokesperson so I'm out talking to people all the time-
Yeah.
... and I often get that because if you're a small or
medium business, it's just really hard to deal with government in general-
Yeah.
... particularly, um-... in fact, with some of these contracts
because the way that they, RFPs are worded or some of
your, like, requirements do lock out our small businesses,
um, or say small NGOs from delivering.
Um, and, and it's not even a cost thing sometimes-
Mm-hmm.
It's not even about that. It's because they don't have
multi-corporation organizations of people writing their RFPs for
them-
Mm-hmm.
... their tenders and stuff like that.
So are you considering how you could,
with your procurement, I mean, 95% of New Zealand businesses are
SMEs, um, how you could look at
having that balance? Because I do know that there is ease-
Oh-
... in accountability with being able to have larger companies delivering-
Mm-hmm.
I, I get that. But at the same time, I think we're missing opportunities and,
and actually particularly in the aid side of things, um, smaller
NGOs in New Zealand could be delivering certain things with Brand
Kiwi, and we know that they're not, um-
... and they're locked out of that because we use, utilize a large organization.
Um, and just 'cause they've got an office based in New Zealand, they tick that box,
but they're not necessarily, I don't think, delivering
Brand New Zealand the way that we could be.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so I'm not sure as part of this review process-
Yep. ... what you-
Yeah.
... what you're working on now.
Yeah. And, and on the development side,
um, yeah, there's, there's, there, there's probably some good things that we could
follow up, Superi, to understand from companies, like, what are the kind of their
biggest barriers-
Mm-hmm.
... in terms of engaging with us? Like, what are those things that are really
making life difficult for them? We tend to or we need to follow government
procurement, uh-
Mm-hmm. ... rules, um, but there may be something particularly from a development side
that we, we could work on or, or, um, or
alter. Um, in terms of sort of, uh,
NGOs, we do do a lot of work with a whole range of different
NGOs, New Zealand NGOs and some of the international ones.
And we have quite an active program, uh, with them, and we have contestable
rounds where people can just put in bids sort of no matter who you are for
a-
Mm-hmm.
... a specific project or a private project or something.
So it might be that we need to do more work to make sure-
... people know about-
Yeah.
... some of these opportunities.
Okay.
Qui- I joined the table because the procurement team sits, uh, sits in the group
that I head. And, um, I think the, the,
the wish of the government or the requirement of MB2C,
uh, New Zea- economic benefit to New Zealand, um,
in, um, in contracts under
100,000, and then that is given a weight, particular weighting-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, in contracts above that is very well understood.
Benedict's outlined the particular issues that we need to take account into the
aid program, um, context. Um, more broadly,
there's, uh, there's work that we do for, um,
all for, for the purposes of the ministry in the Pacific and elsewhere in
terms of contracts. So it's a live issue across, um, the way
in which we, the way in which we work.
Mm-hmm.
Um, engaging with New Zealand business, um, helping
understand their possibilities and what our contracts look like is
important. Um, and it is an active strand of my, my team's
work. Um, so please, if there's something that there's a
concern about who you think we're not, um, we're not getting, um,
it'd be good to hear about it.
Mm-hmm.
And actually, Graham has just reminded me that in Southeast Asia- (laughs) ...
our development program has actually quite a good lot of New Zealand commercial
activity. Indonesia geothermal- Mm-hmm.
... which has been longstanding, Vietnam some fruit research, and south across the
region, Starboard maritime surveillance.
So there's some really positive pockets that we probably need to actually be
telling people about so- (laughs) ...
people see the opportunity as well, other companies. Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
Next question, Vaneshi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, in mid-year, I asked a question
about, uh, exploring the World Bank group projects as a
potential opportunity for partnership and development.
Um, and I think the response was there was some interest in exploring around
energy. Has that progressed at all? Is that likely to progress?
So we, we do do, uh, quite a lot of work with the World
Bank, more so with the Asia Development Bank because they tend to be more active in
the Pacific-
Mm-hmm.
... where we're- Mm-hmm. ... um, more active. But we, we do continue to
engage, uh, at World Bank at, at all levels.
So I'm trying to remember the specific project you, you talked
to me about as well. (laughs)
Yeah, I, I, I talked about, um, off- offshore wind as something that
potentially could be explored. Um, but I'm not sure if
that has progressed to that amount of detail or whether
there's...
Let me come back to you.
Thank you. (laughs)
Okay, members, I'm mindful we only have, uh, 12 minutes left.
Uh, are we happy to move on to the consular services?
There are questions from members there? Dr. Lareshanang?
Thank you, Chair. I just have one question on this.
Um, do you know how many honorary consulates do we have and how are they
being s- supported?
Uh, I don't have the precise number off the top of my head.
It may well be a figure in the annual report.
Okay.
But how we support-
Residential consuls.
Counsul- ... them and these honorary consuls, you know, they play a very important role
in giving great c-
Residential consuls, yeah.
... in depth to our relationship. So I was formerly ambassador in Washington and
we have honorary consuls right across the United States.
And in such a vast country to have people who are sometimes American
citizens, sometimes, um, New Zealanders who have become American
citizens-
Mm-hmm.
... um, play a great role in connecting us in places like Salt Lake
City and Atlanta, Georgia or Chicago where we don't have diplomatic
representation. So the means by which we support them is that in each
country that they're in, the embassy
is that kind of, um, is the kind of shepherd for them.
Um, I was high commissioner in London, we had honorary consuls in
Belfast and Edinburgh, and it was part of my
responsibilities every single month to be having
VTCs with them to ensure that they knew what was going on in New
Zealand and what the embassy was doing and vice versa.Um, we can't ask
too much of them because these are not, uh, full time
roles. Um, uh, but they do play an important
role in, in helping to lift our relationships.
We presently have 73.
73. Thank you, Tom.
Oh, that's not a lot. Great, thank you.
Oh.
All right.
Excellent. Okay, uh, next question from Diana Kirkpatrick.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I was fascinated by this and it's probably something
quite low level, uh, in the bigger scheme of your, um, annual
spend. But, I was really interested in the consular loans-
Mm-hmm.
...and, uh, and what they might, um, be.
It sort of seemed a fascinating, um, part of the annual plan and-
Yeah.
...just, uh, of the annual report, I'm sorry.
Um, but just I note, um, that, yeah, low, low
level in terms of dollars. But, but do a couple of things.
Firstly, what kind of things would be considered appropriate
for consular loans? And, um, are they repaid?
So, important question. I think the figure is quite low.
I think from memory is it 63,000, something like that?
In the last...
Uh, 90.
90, I'm sorry. I got the... I undershot that figure.
Yes, ni- ni- Well, the appropriation's 100.
That's the appropriation, but then there's how much is actually spent year on year.
90.
Um, in any case, having got that number, um, wrong, I'll ask
Victoria now to ensure reliable-
(laughing) You might have it right. I might be wrong.
I've now undermined my authority to answer this question.
(laughing)
Uh, thanks, thanks very much. Um, the ability to provide a
consular loan is a really, um, important and valued
consular tool. Um, the cri- uh, criteria
around when they are on offer, uh, is really stringent as
you could imagine. And it's basically when people,
uh, do not have any access, uh, to other
resources, including from friends and family, and they
need a small loan in order to get themselves to a place of
safety, uh, and to meet immediate needs,
um, in the location. Um,
and, uh, the overall, um, loan
balance, uh, that the Ministry's holding at the moment is
actually around $750,000. And I
think that reflects, uh, that during the COVID
era, uh, a lot more people found themselves, uh, for longer
periods of time in situations, uh, where they were displayed
that genuine need. Um,
however, uh, the, um, repayment picture,
um, in normal con- times is, is much more
positive than that. Uh, so the figures I have is
that over the past year, we issued loans,
um, to value of
90,196. Uh, but we also, in that same
period, received repayments of 97,000.
Mm, significantly. Yep.
Um, so, uh, the, the payments are coming in.
Um, we do have though 124
loans on our book, um, for which there was no
repayment in the, the last financial year.
And, um, as of about a year ago, we now have a
process where after we've exhausted efforts to get,
um, the consular, former consular clients to engage,
uh, and make arrangements, we do refer the loans through to
debt collectors.
Okay, thank you. That's very thoughtful response.
Can you give me an example of how s- a co- the kind of thing someone might
find themselves, uh, needing one of these loans?
Without having obviously divulging personal secret-
Yeah. The, the sort of thing that might, um, occur
is where you have a vulnerable
traveler, uh, with serious mental health
concerns, no immediate access to
resources. Uh, and the best thing is to get them back to
New Zealand, uh, where they can receive appropriate support
from the New Zealand services. Uh, and sometimes these
people, uh, you know, can be young and very vulnerable.
Hmm. Okay. That's interesting. Thank you.
Thank you. Next question, Vanesha Walters.
Thank you. Um, it looks to me like there's been a slight drop in the
satisfaction survey of- if that's correct, to
72%. I was just wondering if you could speak generally to that as well as what's
been done to address that.
Yeah. We have as our, um,
success measure, uh, 80%. Um, I think that is a
stretch goal.
Mm.
Um, I've looked at the figures over the...
That they were highest in 2018, '19, which is of
course before, before COVID. They have been hovering
around, um, the early 70s for the last, the
last couple of years. Um, of course, uh, no one
wants to find themselves, uh, being a consular case, so
we're inherently dealing with people, uh, that are often having
quite bad life events happen. Um, I'm very proud of the work
that our consular teams do. I know that people put a huge
amount of, uh, personal effort and commitment into
it. So we're always trying to find ways in which we can,
uh, deliver better, uh, to New Zealanders in these
circumstances. And a lot of that is by trying to help New Zealanders
prepare before they go offshore, uh, and, uh,
not get themselves into difficulty in the first place.
We're, um, constantly updating our travel advisories, uh,
encouraging new Zealanders to register before they go offshore,
because that allows them to get up-to-date, uh, alerts on
evolving situations. And of course, uh, we're constantly
emphasizing the importance of having good travel insurance.
Would it be fair to say that cases like the Iranian
issue or New Caledonia prior to that as well-
Mm-hmm. ... could potentially have detrimental impact on those statistics?
Yeah, I mean-
Yeah.
... you're subject to a lot of, uh, a lot of difficult
circumstances. Um, m-many of the larger
consular events are events completely out of our, our
control, uh, and we have, you know, small teams doing their best
alongside consular partners, uh, to, to
deliver, uh, to New Zealanders and provide them the support they need.
Mm-hmm.
All right, we might move into any final questions then.
Uh, we have one from Laura McClure.
Yeah, um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so first I just want to acknowledge that, uh,
people in Ukraine are gonna be going into their third crisis, fourth year
next year, and it's still a war and often, uh, forgotten about.
Um, not by you guys, but just in general.
And I've heard recent reports around, um,
Russian oil getting into New Zealand via, um-
(clears throat)
Mm-hmm.
... (?) that, um, had this come in. I was really shocked to
hear that, 'cause we know that we've got our Sanctions Act.
Um, I believe this oil was refined in, um, India.
Hmm.
So, would you be able to clarify, um,
what is our position on
point of origin? Um, is it acceptable that we are to
take or we're to sell oil in New Zealand that has been refined
somewhere else, um,
en route? And (stutters) I mean, I think the expectation is
of the New Zealand public is that when you're filling up...
I mean, I'd be mortified to know that I put Russian oil into my vehicle.
So ultimately, um, do you think that the
act is fit for purpose? Do we need to make some changes?
Um,
and, and yeah, what... I guess, what is your take on that
issue?
Uh, thanks. It's a really complicated situation.
As you've alluded to, we have a very comprehensive set of
sanctions, uh, on Russia, uh, in
response to the Russian aggression, and those are
constantly calibrated with those of our, our key
partners, um, particularly, uh, the US,
Australia, the UK, EU. Um,
however, there is, uh, concern
about, um, trying to make sure that, uh,
Russia isn't able to kind of evade and c- can
benefit from, um, exporting oil. Uh,
it's a really complicated issue though.
Um, the orthodox, uh, methods of determining
origin of oil, uh, focus, and this is under the
WTO framework, on the location where that oil
was substantially transformed, uh, and that
is the oil refinering process. And,
um, uh, it's not, uh, very straightforward
to look under the, the hood. Um,
it is, uh, correct that, uh, as recently as
July, the EU has taken some new measures, um,
on this. And, uh, that has involved a ban
on the import of refined products, um, made from Russian oil.
We're looking at that and, and studying that and understanding.
We're also... It's something where we're talking closely
to our Australian, uh, partners, uh, because,
uh, in many ways, uh, New Zealand and Australia operate as
one sort of common destination for oil
exports.
Mm-hmm.
Um, the good news, though, uh, is that,
um, uh, we think this is a, a, a relatively
minor problem, uh, in the New Zealand context.
A large amount of our oil actually comes from Korea,
and, uh, we understand that, uh, this issue isn't,
uh, a significant issue for, um, oil that's being refined
in Korea. So we're talking about a, a, a, a very small
component, but something we're actively, um, considering
and, uh, trying to, uh, come up with an assessment of.
Okay, thanks.
All right, we've got time for one quick question-
Okay, brevity please.
... from
Uh, (laughs) to Mr. Vitalis, um, you mentioned about the-
(laughs)
. (laughs)
Sorry.
Sorry, we don't have time for that. (laughs) .
Rule-based, rule-based trade, but yet we also know that the US has blocked both of
the fill- appellate body vacancies the 91st
time. We're seeing a collapse of the way
that those kind of, of accountability measures is done in trade.
What's actually stopping people from making those unilateral decisions that the EU
is doing, increasing the tariffs that US is doing?
WTO no longer have the teeth it used to.
Okay.
(laughs)
Brevity.
In one word. (laughs) .
It was a long question for brevity to make that
(laughs) . I- i- it is a really difficult
answer to, uh, uh, Chris' question answered briefly-
Maybe provide us on post-hearing questions. (laughs)
... but, but maybe I can... I, I'd say a couple of things.
One, um,
yes, the WTO appellate body function doesn't work, um,
because of the reason you've just identified, which is the United States continues
to refuse to join consensus to appoint,
uh, appellate body members to hear appeals.
Um, but what we have done is, um, uh, to go to your point about
unilateral measures, there are, there is now what's called multiparty interim
arrangement, which does include the EU, which is a shadow, a sort
of a, a form of a shadow appellate body system.
In other words, you can take a case in, in Geneva at the WTO,
and then if you or the person you've taken the case against wants
to take an appeal but there are no judges there to hear the appeal, you could use
the multiparty interim arrangement if you are a member.
Not all W- not all of the 166 members are a member,
uh, and that would be, that would be one avenue you could pursue.
So, um,
the second, uh, element, of course, is the trade agreements that you have in
place with colleagues. So as New Zealand has already demonstrated, we are willing
to use a trade agreement to enforce our rights, as we have done in the case
of, of Canada.
Mm-hmm.
So there are still... Uh, there is not a functioning
multilateral system in that sense, but there are now these
safety nets or
elements that we shored up the system to try to sustain, uh, it as much as
we can. Uh, and I... You know, we're an active user of that,
um, of that system and it's a really important one.
So it's a, it's a great question. Thank you.
Thank
you. This, this is the shortest answer Mike Ellis has ever given. (laughs)
. (laughs)
All right, we're really trying.
We will wrap- we will wrap it up. Really appreciate it.
Um, just before we finish, Ken, I thank you for your time today,
for the wider team as well. And I think on behalf of the committee, thanks again
to the wider network of New Zealanders, uh,
particularly those abroad. And I really, uh, specifically want to acknowledge Dr.
Richard Kay and Sam O'Connor in the UAE.
I was up there recently and was really impressed with the work they're doing.
Uh, and Andrew Meads in Canberra last week as well.
So, and we have amazing people out there doing amazing things on behalf of New
Zealand and we really want to acknowledge that. Thank you.
Oh, thank you, chairman and thank you committee, and we'll pass that feedback on.
Thank you.
You'll be very welcome at the summit yet.
In particular,
thanks-